


Once there were two peasants, both of them very poor. One lived by means of
all kinds of lies and deceit, he swindled and stole. But the other followed
the path of truth and honest labor. These two peasants had a dispute over the
manner of living that each had chosen. One said: "It is better to live by
wrong." And the other said: "You cannot live by wrong all your life, it is
better to live by right." They quarreled and quarreled, but neither could
convince the other. They went out to the road and agreed to ask the first
three people whom they should meet to settle their dispute. So they walked and
walked and finally saw a serf plowing a field. They approached him and said:
"God speed you, friend! Please settle our quarrel: how is it better to live in
the world - by right or by wrong?" "Brothers, you cannot live long by right;
it is easier to live by wrong. Take my case, for instance. Our masters
constantly take our days away, and we have no time to work for ourselves; but
if you pretend that you cannot come because you are ill, you can manage to go
get some wood for yourself, if not during the day - since it is forbidden - at
least by night." "Do you hear? I am right!" said the wicked peasant to the
righteous one.

Again they walked along the road, waiting to see what the next person whom
they should meet would say. They walked and walked, and at last saw a merchant
in a carriage driving a pair of horses. They approached him and said: "Please
stop a moment. If Your Grace does not take it amiss, we should like to ask you
something. Settle our quarrel: how is it better to live in the world - by
right or by wrong?" "No, my boys, it is hard to live by right, it is easier to
live by wrong. We are cheated, and we must cheat others too." "Do you hear? I
am right!" said the wicked peasant again to the righteous one.

So they walked farther along the road, waiting to see what the third person
would tell them. They walked and walked till they saw a clerk driving toward
them. They approached him and said: "Stop a moment, settle our quarrel: how is
it better to live in the world, by right or by wrong?" "What a question to
ask! By wrong, of course! What right is there nowadays? For doing right you
are sent to Siberia, accused of scheming." "Do you hear?" said the wicked
peasant to the righteous one. "Everyone says it is better to live by wrong."
"No, one must live in God's way, as God has commanded us; come what may, I
will not live by wrong," the righteous man answered the other.

Again they walked on the road together. They walked and walked. The wicked man
managed to get along everywhere; he got all the food he needed, he even got
cakes; but the righteous man was fed only when he worked for his keep. And the
wicked man continually made fun of him. Once the righteous man begged the
wicked one for a piece of bread: "Please give me a piece of bread." "And what
will you give me in return?" asked the wicked one. "Take whatever you wish,
whatever I have," said the righteous man. "Shall I gouge out one of your eyes?"
"Go ahead, gouge it out," said the righteous man. And so the wicked man gouged
out an eye of the righteous one and gave him a bit of bread. The righteous man
did not protest; he took the bread, ate it, and again they walked along the
road.

They walked and walked, and again the righteous man began to beg the wicked
one for a piece of bread. Again the wicked one began to make fun of him: "Let
me gouge out your other eye, then I'll give you a piece." "Ah, brother, have
pity on me! If you do that, I shall be blind," the righteous man implored him.
"No, it's because you are righteous and I live by wrong," the wicked man told
him. There was nothing to be done, so the righteous man said to the wicked
one: "Well, gouge out my other eye, if you do not fear to commit such a sin."
The wicked one gouged out his other eye, gave him a little bread, and left him
on the road, saying: "You cannot expect me to guide you!"

What should he do now? The blind man ate his little piece of bread and went on
slowly, groping with his stick. He walked till he got off the road and did not
know where to go. Then he prayed to God: "Lord, do not forsake thy sinful
servant!" He prayed and prayed. Then he heard a voice saying: "Go to the right.
On the right you will find a wood. When you come to the wood, grope for the
path. When you find the path, walk along it. Somewhere along the path you will
come to a spring. When you come to the spring, wash yourself with the water
from it, drink it, and wet your eyes with it; then you will recover your sight.
Then go upstream along the spring, and you will see a big oak. When you find
the oak, go to it and climb up into it. There await the night; and when night
comes, listen to what the evil spirits say under this oak - for there they
gather together to discuss their affairs."

He somehow managed to reach the wood. When he reached the wood, he stumbled
and plodded through it, and somehow managed to find the path; he walked along
this path, till he reached the spring. He washed himself with water from the
spring, drank some water, and wetted his eyes; and he saw God's world, for he
had recovered his sight. And when he recovered his sight he walked upstream
along the spring; he walked and walked and at last saw a big oak, under which
the ground was trampled flat. He climbed up into this oak, and awaited the
night. Then devils came from all directions and assembled under the oak.  They
came and came, and each began to tell where he had been. One of them said: "I
was with such and such a princess; I have been tormenting her for ten years.
They have tried to drive me out of her in every possible way, but in vain;
only he can drive me out who goes to such and such a wealthy merchant and gets
from him the image of the Smolensk Mother of God that is nailed to his gate."

Next morning, when all the devils had dispersed, our righteous man climbed
down from the oak. He went to search for the merchant the devil had named. He
searched and searched for him, till at last he found him. Then he asked the
merchant whether he could work for him: "I will work for you a whole year, and
all I want for wages is the image of the Mother of God on your gate." The
merchant consented and hired him as a laborer.

And so he worked for the merchant with all his strength for a whole year round.
Having thus worked, he asked for the image. However, the merchant said: "Well,
brother, I am satisfied with your work, but I do not wish to lose that image;
take money instead." "No, I do not need money; give me the image as we agreed."
"No, I will not give you the image. Work for me another year, then I will give
it to you." So it came to pass that our righteous peasant worked for another
year; he did not rest by night or day, he worked all the time, so diligent was
he. Having thus worked, he again asked for the image of the Mother of God on
the gate. The merchant again was loath to give him the image and release him,
and said: "No, I would rather reward you with money - unless you want to work
for another year, then I will give you the image."

There was nothing the peasant could do, so he began to work for a third year.
He worked even harder than before; everyone marveled at him, he was such a
hard worker. Having thus worked a third year, he asked for the image. The
merchant now had no choice but to take the image from the gate and give it to
him. "Well, take the image," he said, "and God speed you." He gave him food
and drink and rewarded him with a small sum of money.

And so it came to pass that he took the image of the Smolensk Mother of God
and hung it on himself; then he went to the king of that country, to cure the
princess who was tormented by a devil. He walked and walked till he came to
the palace. He said to the king: "I can cure your princess." And so he was
admitted to the king's private chambers and shown the suffering princess. He
asked for water and water was given him. He made the sign of the cross and
bowed three times to the ground, and prayed to God; having prayed, he removed
the image of the Mother of God from his body, and with a prayer on his lips
immersed it in the water three times, and then put it on the princess; having
put it on her he told her to wash in the same water. And when she put the
image on her and washed in that water, suddenly her disease, that is, the evil
spirit, flew out of her; and when he flew out, she was as whole as before.
Seeing this, all the company rejoiced mightily and did not know how to reward
the righteous peasant: they offered him land, a hereditary estate, and a large
pension. But he would not accept anything. Then the princess said to the king:
"I want to marry this man." "Very well," said the king. And so they wedded,
and our peasant began to wear royal garments, live in royal apartments, and
eat and drink just like the rest of the king's family. He lived like this for
a long while and became accustomed to their manners and way of life.

And having become accustomed to them, he said: "Let me go to my native
village; there I have my old mother, who is very poor." "Very well," said the
princess, that is to say, his wife, "let us go together." So he and the
princess went together. Their horses, clothes, trappings, carriage, everything,
were royal. They drove and drove and finally approached the peasant's native
village. On the road they happened to meet the wicked man who had quarreled
with him as to whether it is better to live by wrong or by right. As the
carriage approached this fellow, the righteous man said, "Good day, brother,"
and called him by his name. The man was amazed that the magnificent nobleman
in the carriage, whom he had never seen, should know him.

"Do you recall," the stranger said, "that we once had a dispute as to whether
it is better to live by wrong or by right, and you gouged out my eyes? I am
that same man!" The other was afraid and did not know what to do. But the
righteous man said to him: "No, do not be afraid, I am not angry at you I wish
you the same good fortune. Go to such and such a wood" - and he proceeded to
instruct him just as he himself had been instructed by God. "In that wood you
will see a path. Go along that path. You will reach a spring; drink water from
it, and wash; and after you have washed, go upstream along the spring, and you
will see a big oak. Climb up on it, and sit there all night. Under it evil
spirits gather. Listen and you will hear your fate."

The wicked man followed these instructions to the letter. He found the wood
and the path. He went along the path and came to the spring, drank of it, and
washed. Having washed, he went upstream and saw the big oak and the ground all
trampled flat under it. He climbed up into the oak and awaited the night, and
then he heard evil spirits coming from all directions to gather there. When
they had gathered they heard him breathing in the oak, and, having heard him,
they tore him to shreds. And so this affair was concluded: the righteous man
became the king's son-in-law and the iniquitous one was put to death by the
devils.


