


In a certain kingdom in a certain land there lived a peasant. The time came
for him to be taken as a soldier. His wife was pregnant, and as he bade her
farewell, he said: "Mind you, wife, live decently, do not become the laughing
stock of respectable people. Do not ruin our house, but manage it wisely and
await my return; with the help of God, I may be retired and return home. Here
are fifty rubles for you; whether you give birth to a daughter or a son, keep
the money till the child is of age. Thus you will have a dowry if you want to
marry your daughter; and if God gives us a son, this money will be of no
little help to him when he grows up." He said farewell to his wife and marched
off to the regiment to which he was ordered.

Three months later, his wife bore twin boys and named them each Ivan. The boys
began to grow; like leavened wheat dough they stood higher and higher. When
they were ten years old, their mother sent them to school; soon they learned
their letters and were more than a match for the boyars' and merchants' sons -
no one could read or write or answer questions better than they. The boyars'
and merchants' sons envied the twins and beat and pinched them every day. One
of the brothers said to the other: "How long will they beat and pinch us? Our
mother will never be able to make us enough clothes or buy us enough caps;
whatever we put on, our comrades tear to shreds. Let us show them what we can
do." So they agreed to stand by each other. Next day the boyars' and merchants'
Sons began to provoke them, and they, instead of bearing it patiently, replied
in kind; they smashed an eye of one, tore off a hand of another, and knocked
off the head of a third. They beat them all up, to the very last one. Then
guards came, shackled the two good youths, and threw them into prison. The
affair was brought before the king himself, who summoned the boys, questioned
them about everything, and ordered them to be released, saying: "They are not
guilty. God punished those who started the fight."

When the two Ivans grew up they asked their mother: "Mother, did not our
father leave us some money? If so, let us have it; we will go to town to the
fair and buy us each a good horse." Their mother gave them fifty rubles,
twenty-five to each, and said: "Listen to me, children! As you travel to town,
bow to everyone whom you encounter." "Very well, dear mother," the two Ivans
said.

The brothers went to town, came to the horse market, looked about, and saw
many horses; but none was strong enough for the good youths. The one brother
said to the other: "Let us go to the other end of the square; see what
enormous crowds are gathered there." They made their way through the crowd and
saw two colts fastened with chains to oaken posts-one with six chains, the
other with twelve. The horses tugged at their chains, gnawed their bits, and
pawed the ground with their hoofs. No one could go near them. "What is the
price of your colts?" one of the brothers asked the owner. "Don't put your
nose into this, friend," answered the owner. "These mares are not for the
likes of you." "Why do you talk without knowing what you're talking about?"
said one Ivan. "Perhaps I can buy them-only first I must look at their teeth."
The owner smiled. "Go ahead, look - if you don't mind losing your head!"

One of the brothers went up to the horse that was tied with six chains and the
other to the horse that was tied with twelve chains. They tried to look at the
horses' teeth, but there was no way of doing it; the colts reared up on their
hind legs and snorted viciously. The brothers struck them in the breast with
their knees; the chains burst asunder, the colts jumped up as high as ten
yards, and fell with their legs up. "See what you boasted of!" said the
brothers. "We wouldn't take such jades for a gift."

The crowd gasped with amazement at champions of such strength. The horse
dealer was almost in tears: his colts had galloped beyond the town and began
to run all over the open field; no one dared to come close to them and no one
knew how to catch them. The two Ivans were sorry for the owner, went into the
open field, called with loud shouts and mighty whistling, and the colts came
back and stood as though rooted to the spot. The two good youths put the iron
chains on them, led them to the oaken posts, and tethered them tightly. When
they had done this they went home.

As they walked along the road, they met a gray old man, but, forgetting what
their mother had told them, they passed him by without greeting him. Later one
of them realized their mistake and said: "Ah, brother, what have we done? We
did not bow to that old man; let us run after him and bow to him." They caught
up with the old man, doffed their caps, bowed to the waist, and said: "Forgive
us, grandfather, for having gone by without greeting you. Our mother enjoined
upon us strictly to pay honor to everyone whom we meet." "Thanks, good youths!
Whither is God taking you?" "We went to the fair and wanted to buy a horse for
each of us, but we could not find suitable ones." "How is that? Shall I give
you each a little horse?" "Ah, grandfather, if you do, we shall always pray to
God for you." "Well, come with me." The old man led them to a big mountain,
opened a cast-iron door, and brought out two mighty steeds. "Here are your
horses, good youths! God speed you - keep them and enjoy them!" They thanked
him, mounted the steeds, and galloped home; they reached their house, tied the
steeds to a post, and entered in. Their mother asked them: "Well, my children,
have you got your horses?" "We did not buy them, we received them free."
"Where have you put them?" "At the side of the house." "Ah, my children,
someone might take them away." "No, mother, not such horses. No one could even
come near them, let alone take them away." The mother went out to the yard,
looked at the horses, and burst into tears. "Ah, my dear sons," she said,
"surely you are not going to be my support."

Next day the sons asked their mother's leave to go to town and buy swords for
themselves. "Go, my beloved ones," she said. They made ready and went to the
smithy. "Make us each a sword," they said to the master. "Why should I make
them when I have them ready?" said the smith. "Take as many as you need." "No,
friend, we need swords that weigh a thousand pounds each." "Eh, what kind of
idea is that? Who could wield such a machine? In the whole world there is no
forge big enough to forge them." The good youths hung their heads and went
home; on their way they met the same old man. "Good day, young men," he said.
"Good day, grandfather," they replied. "Where have you been?" "At the smithy
in town; we wanted to buy a sword for each of us, but we could not find any
suitable ones." "That's bad! Shall I give you each a sword?" "Ah, grandfather,
if you do, we shall always pray to God for you." The old man led them to the
big mountain, opened a cast-iron door, and brought out two mighty swords. They
took the swords and thanked the old man, and their hearts were full of joy.

The two Ivans came home, and their mother asked them: "Well, my children, have
you bought the swords?" "We did not buy them, we got them free." "Where have
you put them?" "We have stood them up in front of the house." "Look out,
someone might take them." "No, mother, no one could even lift them, let alone
cart them away." The mother went out to the yard and saw two huge, heavy
swords leaning against the wall, so that the little hut barely remained
upright. She burst into tears and said: "Ah, my sons, surely you are not going
to be my support."

Next morning the two Ivans saddled their good steeds, came into the house,
prayed to God, and said farewell to their mother. "Give us your blessing,
mother," they said, "for our distant journey." "Let my never-ceasing maternal
blessing be upon you, my children," she said. "Go with God, show yourselves,
and see people; offend no one without cause, and yield not to evil enemies."
"Fear not, mother! We have a motto: 'When I ride I don't whistle, but when I
am forced to fight, I don't yield.'" And the good youths mounted their steeds
and rode off.

After they had gone a short distance or a long distance, a long time or a
short time-for speedily a tale is spun, but with less speed a deed is done-
they came to a crossroads where two posts stood. One post bore the
inscription: 'He who goes to the right will become a king.' The other post
bore the inscription: 'He who goes to the left will be slain.' The brothers
stopped, read the inscriptions on the posts and wondered in which direction
each should go. If both took the right, it would not do honor to their mighty
strength, their youthful valor. If one went to the left - but who wants to
die? But there was no choice, and so one brother said to the other: "Well,
dear brother, I am stronger than you; I will go to the left and see what it is
that can cause my death. But do you go to the right; perhaps God will help you
and you will become king." They said farewell to each other, exchanged
handkerchiefs, and solemnly agreed that each would go his way, put up posts
along the road, and write about himself on these posts as a mark and guide.
They pledged that every morning each of them would wipe his face with his
brother's handkerchief; if one of them should see blood appearing on the
handkerchief, it would mean that death had befallen his brother, and in the
event of such a calamity he was to set out in search of the dead.

The good youths parted. The one who turned his steed to the right came to a
glorious kingdom. In that kingdom there lived a king and queen whose daughter
was Princess Nastasya the Beautiful. When the king saw Ivan, the soldier's son,
he loved him for his heroic valor, and without thinking very long about it
gave him his daughter to wife, called him Prince Ivan, and charged him with
the rule of the whole kingdom. Prince Ivan lived happily, feasted his eyes
upon his wife, gave law and order to the kingdom and amused himself by hunting
animals. One day he made ready to go hunting, began to put the trappings on
his horse, and found two phials sewed up in the saddle: one contained healing
water and the other the water of life. He looked at these phials and put them
back into the saddle. "I shall keep them for my hour of danger," he thought.
"Some day they may be needed."

Meanwhile the brother who had taken the road to the left galloped night and
day without rest; a month, a second month, then a third month passed, and he
arrived in an unknown kingdom, in the center of its capital. There was a great
sorrow in this kingdom: the houses were draped with black cloth, the people
staggered about as though in sleep. He hired wretched quarters at a poor old
woman's house and began to question her. "Tell me, grandmother," he said, "why
are all the people in your kingdom so grieved, why are all the houses draped
with black cloth?" "Ah, good youth," the old woman said, "a great misfortune
has come upon us. Every day a twelve-headed dragon comes forth from the blue
sea, from behind a gray stone, and devours a man; and now it is the turn of
the king's family. He has three beautiful princesses; just now the oldest has
been taken to the shore, to be devoured by the dragon."

Ivan, the soldier's son, mounted his horse and galloped to the blue sea, to
the gray stone: on the shore stood the beautiful princess, bound by an iron
chain. She saw the knight and said to him: "Go hence, good youth! Soon the
twelve-headed dragon will come. I am doomed, and if you stay you will not
escape death either; the cruel dragon will devour you." "Fear not, lovely
maiden," he replied. "He might choke to death on me." Ivan came up to her,
seized the chain with his mighty hand, and tore it into little bits as though
it were a rotten rope; then he laid his head on the lovely maiden's knee and
said: "Now pick in my hair for lice. But do not so much pick as watch the sea:
as soon as a cloud arises, and the winds begin to roar, and the sea to surge,
rouse me." The lovely maiden did as he told her; more than she picked in his
hair, she watched the sea. Suddenly a cloud arose, the wind began to roar, the
sea surged; a dragon emerged from the blue sea and reared up in the air. The
princess roused Ivan; he rose, and had no sooner mounted his steed than the
dragon flew up to him. "Why have you come here, Ivanushka?" the monster said.
"This is my place. Say farewell to the white world and hasten into my throat
of your own accord-it will be easier for you." "You lie, accursed dragon!"
answered the champion. "You won't swallow me, you will choke on me!" He bared
his sharp sword, took a swing, and cut off all the twelve heads of the dragon;
he lifted the gray stone, put the heads under it, threw the trunk into the sea,
returned home to the old woman, ate and drank his fill, lay down to sleep, and
slept for three days.

Meanwhile the king had called his water carrier and said to him: "Go to the
shore, at least gather up the princess' bones." The water carrier went to the
blue sea and saw that the princess was alive and unhurt. He put her on his
cart and drove into a thick forest; in the forest he began to whet his knife.
"What are you going to do?" the princess asked him. "I am whetting my knife to
slay you," replied the water carrier. The princess began to weep. "Do not slay
me, I have not done you any harm," she begged. "Tell your father that I have
rescued you from the dragon," the water carrier said. "Then I will spare you."
She had no choice but to consent. They went to the palace. The king was
overjoyed and made the water carrier a colonel.

When Ivan awoke he called the old woman, gave her money, and said to her:
"Grandmother, go to market, buy what you need, and listen to what the people
are saying among themselves. Find out what news there is." The old woman went
to market, bought various provisions, listened to people's talk, returned home,
and said: "This is what people are saying. There was a great dinner at the
king's palace; princes and envoys and boyars and notables were sitting at his
table, when an iron arrow flew through the window and fell in the middle of
the chamber; to that arrow was fastened a letter from another twelve-headed
dragon. The dragon wrote: 'If you do not send me your second daughter, I shall
burn your kingdom with fire and scatter its ashes.' Now they are about to take
the poor maiden to the blue sea, to the gray stone." Ivan straightway saddled
his good steed, mounted him, and galloped to the seashore. The princess said
to him: "Why have you come here, good youth? My turn has come to die and to
shed my young blood; but why should you perish?" "Fear not, lovely maiden!"
said Ivan. "God may save you." He had no sooner said this than the cruel
dragon flew up to him, breathing flames, threatening him with death. The
champion struck him with his sharp sword and cut off all of his twelve heads;
he put the heads under the stone, threw the trunk into the sea, returned home,
ate and drank his fill, and again lay down to sleep for three days and three
nights. The water carrier went down to the shore again, saw that the princess
was alive, put her in his cart, drove to the thick forest, and set about
whetting his knife. The princess asked him: "Why are you whetting your knife?"
"Because I am going to slay you," he said. "But if you swear to tell your
father what I ask you to tell him, I will spare you." The princess swore that
she would, and he brought her to the palace. The king was overjoyed and made
the water carrier a general.

On the fourth day Ivan awoke and told the old woman to go to market and listen
to the news. The old woman ran to the market, returned, and said: "A third
dragon has appeared; he sent the king a letter demanding that the third
princess be sent him to be devoured." Ivan saddled his good steed, mounted him,
and galloped to the blue sea. On the shore stood the beautiful princess, bound
to the stone with an iron chain. The champion seized the chain, shook it, and
broke it as though it were a rotten rope; then he laid his head on the lovely
maiden's knees, saying: "Pick in my hair; and do not so much pick in my hair
as watch the sea-as soon as a cloud arises, and the wind begins to roar and
the sea to surge, rouse me." The princess began to pick in his hair. Suddenly
a cloud came up, the wind began to roar and the sea to surge, and from the
blue sea a dragon emerged and reared himself up. The princess began to rouse
Ivan; she nudged and nudged him, but he did not awake. She burst into tears,
and burning tears dropped on his cheek. This caused the champion to wake; he
ran to his steed, and the good steed had already dug up half a yard of earth
with his hoofs. The twelve-headed dragon flew toward them, breathing flames.
He cast a glance at the champion and cried: "You are handsome and strong, good
youth, but you won't stay alive; I'll devour you down to the last bone." "You
lie, accursed dragon!" Ivan answered him. "You will choke on me."

Instantly they were locked in mortal combat Ivan swung his sword so fast and
mightily that it grew red hot, he could not hold it in his hand. He begged the
princess: "Save me, lovely maiden! Take off your precious kerchief, wet it in
the blue sea, and give it to me to wrap my sword in." The princess straightway
wet her kerchief and gave it to the good youth. He wrapped it around his sword
and fell to hacking at the dragon; he cut off all the twelve heads of the
monster, put them under the stone, threw the trunk into the sea, galloped home,
ate and drank his fill, and lay down to sleep for three days. Again the king
sent the water carrier to the seashore. The water carrier went there, took the
princess to the thick forest, drew out his knife, and began to whet it. "What
are you doing?" asked the princess. "I am whetting my knife to slay you," he
answered. He terrified the lovely maiden, and she swore that she would say
what he commanded. Now the youngest daughter was the king's favorite; when he
saw her alive and unhurt, he was even more overjoyed than before, and to
reward the water carrier wished to give him this favorite daughter to wife.
The rumor of it went through the whole kingdom. Ivan the champion learned that
the king was making preparations for a wedding. He went straight to the
palace; there a feast was in full swing, the guests were eating and drinking,
and diverting themselves with various games. The youngest princess saw Ivan,
recognized her precious kerchief on his sword, jumped up, took him by his hand,
and brought him to her father. "My dear father and sovereign," she said, "here
is the man who saved us from the cruel dragon and from undeserved death; and
all that the water carrier did was whet his knife and say: 'I am whetting my
knife to slay you." The king was furious, ordered the water carrier to be
hanged on the spot, and married the princess to Ivan, the soldier's son. There
was great rejoicing. The young people began to live together happily and
prosperously.

While all this was going on, this is what befell the other brother, Prince
Ivan. One day he went hunting and came upon a fleet-footed stag. He spurred
his horse and pursued the stag; he galloped and galloped and came to a broad
meadow. Here the stag vanished. The prince looked about and wondered in what
direction he should go. Then he saw a little stream flowing in the meadow, and
on the water two gray ducks were swimming. He took aim with his gun, fired it,
and killed the pair of ducks; then he dragged them out of the water, put them
in his bag, and went on farther. He rode and rode, and he saw a white stone
palace; he climbed down from his horse, tied it to a post, and went into the
chambers. They were all empty, there was not a living soul anywhere. But in
one room there was fire in the stove, a pan stood on the hearth, the table was
set: there was a plate, a fork, and a knife. Prince Ivan took the ducks out of
his bag, plucked and cleaned them, put them in the pan, and shoved the pan
into the oven; when the ducks were roasted, he put them on the table and began
to carve and eat them. Suddenly out of nowhere a lovely maiden appeared before
him-such a beauty as neither tongue can tell of nor pen describe-and said:
"Welcome, Prince Ivan." "Welcome, lovely maiden, sit down and eat with me,"
Ivan said. "I would sit with you, but I am afraid: you have a magic horse."
"No, lovely maiden, you are mistaken; my magic horse is at home, I have come
on an ordinary horse." When the lovely maiden heard this she began to swell up
and turned into a terrible lioness; she opened her jaws and swallowed the
prince whole. For she was not an ordinary maiden, but the sister of the three
dragons that Ivan the champion had slain.

One day Ivan the champion recalled his brother, drew from his pocket the
handkerchief that had been the other Ivan's, wiped himself, and lo and behold,
the whole handkerchief was drenched with blood. He grieved deeply. "What does
this mean?" he said. "My brother took the good road, which was to make him
king, and he has met his death!" He took leave of his wife and father-in-law
and went on his mighty steed to seek his brother. After he had journeyed a
short distance or a long distance, for a long time or a short time, he came to
the kingdom where his brother had lived. He made inquiries and learned that
the prince had gone hunting and vanished without a trace. Ivan the champion
went hunting in the same forest and he too saw the fleet-footed stag, and
started in pursuit of it. He came to the wide meadow and the stag vanished; he
saw a little stream flowing through the meadow and two ducks swimming on the
water. Ivan the champion shot the ducks, came to the white stone palace, and
entered the chambers. It was empty everywhere, but in one room there was a
fire in the stove, and a pan stood on the hearth. He roasted the ducks, took
them out on the porch, sat there in the yard, and carved and ate them.

Suddenly a lovely maiden appeared before him. "Welcome, good youth!" she said.
"Why are you eating in the yard?" "I don't like to eat indoors, it is more
pleasant outside," replied Ivan. "Sit down with me, lovely maiden." "I would
sit down gladly, but I am afraid of your magic horse." "Don't be afraid, my
beauty! I have come on an ordinary horse." She foolishly believed him, and she
began to swell up; she became a terrible lioness, but when she was about to
swallow the good youth, his magic steed came running and took hold of her with
his mighty legs. Ivan the champion bared his sharp sword and cried in a loud
voice: "Wait, accursed one! You swallowed my brother, Prince Ivan! Disgorge
him, or I shall cut you into little pieces!" The lioness spat out Prince Ivan;
he was dead, he had begun to rot, and the flesh of his face had fallen off.
Ivan the champion took the two phials with healing water and the water of life
from his saddle; he sprinkled his brother with the healing water, and the
flesh grew together; he sprinkled him with the water of life, and the prince
stood up and said: "Ah, how long have I slept!" Ivan the champion answered:
"You would have slept forever were it not for me."

Then he took his sword and wanted to cut off the lioness' head; but she turned
into an exquisite maiden, such a beauty as no tale can tell of, and began to
shed tears and beg for mercy. Looking on her indescribable beauty, Ivan the
champion took pity on her and let her go free. The brothers went to the palace
and feasted for three days. Then they parted: Prince Ivan remained in his
kingdom, and Ivan the champion went to join his wife and began to live with
her in love and concord.

After some time, Ivan the champion went for a walk in the open field; he met a
little child, who begged him for alms. The good youth was moved, drew a golden
coin from his pocket, and gave it to the boy; the boy took the alms, began to
swell up, turned into a lion, and tore the champion into little bits. A few
days later the same thing happened to Prince Ivan; he went to walk in his
garden and met an old man, who bowed low to him and begged for alms. The
prince gave him a gold piece. The old man took the coin, swelled up, and
turned into a lion, seized Prince Ivan, and tore him into little bits. Thus
died the two mighty champions, the soldier's sons - at the hands of the
dragons' sister.

