


In a certain kingdom, in a certain land, there lived a king and a queen, and
they had an only daughter, Princess Maria. When the queen died, the king took
another wife, Yagishna. Yagishna gave birth to two daughters: one had two eyes,
and the other three eyes. The stepmother disliked Princess Maria, and ordered
her to take Burenushka, the little red cow, to pasture, and gave her a crust
of dry bread for her dinner. The princess went to the open field, bowed to
Burenushka's right leg, ate and drank her fill, and dressed in fine attire;
all day long, dressed like a lady, she tended Burenushka. At the end of the
day, she again bowed to the little cow's right leg, removed her fine attire,
went home carrying back her crust of bread, and put it on the table. "How does
the slut keep alive?" wondered Yagishna. The next day she gave Princess Maria
the same crust, and sent her elder daughter with her, saying: "Give an eye to
what Princess Maria feeds herself with." They came to the open field and
Princess Maria said: "Little sister, let me pick the lice from your head." She
began to pick them, at the same time saying: "Sleep, sleep, little sister!
Sleep, sleep, my dear! Sleep, sleep, little eye! Sleep, sleep, other eye!" The
sister fell asleep, and Princess Maria rose up, went to Burenushka, bowed to
her right leg, ate and drank her fill, dressed herself in fine attire, and all
day long walked around like a lady. Night came; Princess Maria removed her
fine attire and said: "Get up, little sister, get up, my dear, let us go home."
"Ah," said the sister unhappily, "I have slept through the day, and have not
seen anything; now my mother will scold me." They came home; the mother asked
her: "What did Princess Maria eat, what did she drink?" "I have not seen
anything." Yagishna scolded her; next morning she got up and sent her three-
eyed daughter, saying: "Go and see what that slut eats and drinks." The girls
came to the open field where Burenushka grazed, and Princess Maria said:
"Little sister, let me pick the lice from your head." "Pick them, little
sister! Pick them, my dear!" Princess Maria began to pick, saying at the same
time: "Sleep, sleep, little sister! Sleep, sleep, my dear! Sleep, sleep,
little eye! Sleep, sleep, other eye!" She forgot about the third eye, and the
third eye looked and looked at what Princess Maria was doing. She ran to
Burenushka, bowed to her right leg, ate and drank her fill, dressed in fine
attire. When the sun began to set, she again bowed to Burenushka, removed her
fine attire, and went to rouse the three-eyed one: "Get up, little sister!
Getup, my dear! Let us go home !" Princess Maria came home and put her dry
crust on the table. The mother questioned her daughter: "What does she eat and
drink?" The three-eyed one told everything. Yagishna said to her husband:
"Slaughter Burenushka, old man!" And the old man slaughtered the cow. Princess
Maria begged him: "Please, my dear, give me at least a bit of the
entrails!" The old man threw her a bit of the entrails. She took it, placed
it on a gatepost, and a bush with sweet berries grew up on it, and all kinds
of little birds perched there and sang songs of kings and of peasants. Prince
Ivan heard about Princess Maria, came to her stepmother, put a dish on the
table, and said: "Whichever maiden picks a dishful of berries for me, her I
will take for my wife." Yagishna sent her elder daughter to pick berries; the
birds did not even let her come near, she had to guard her eyes lest the birds
peck them out. Yagishna sent her other daughter, and they did not let her come
close either. At last she sent Princess Maria. Princess Maria took the dish
and went to pick the berries; and as she picked them, the little birds placed
twice and thrice as many on the dish as she herself could pick. She returned,
placed the berries on the table, and bowed to the prince. There was a gay
feast and a wedding; Prince Ivan took Princess Maria away, and they began to
live happily and prospered.

After some time, a long time or a short time, Princess Maria gave birth to a
son. She wanted to visit her father, and went to his house with her husband.
Her stepmother turned her into a goose and disguised her elder daughter as
Prince Ivan's wife. Prince Ivan returned home. The old tutor of the child got
up early in the morning, washed himself very clean, took the baby in his arms,
and went to an open field, stopping near a little bush. Geese came flying,
gray geese came. "My geese, gray geese! Where have you seen the baby's mother?"
"In the next flock." The next flock came. "My geese, gray geese! Where have
you seen the baby's mother?" The baby's mother jumped to the ground, tore off
her goose skin, took the baby in her arms, and nursed him at her breast,
crying: "I will nurse him today, I will nurse him tomorrow, but the day after
I will fly beyond the forests dark, beyond the mountains high!" The old man
went home. The little fellow slept till next morning without awakening, and
the false wife railed at the old man for having gone to the open field and for
having starved her son. Next morning again he got up very early, washed
himself very clean, and went with the child to the open field; and Prince Ivan
got up, followed the old man unseen, and hid in the bush. Geese came flying,
gray geese came. The old man called to them: "My geese, gray geese! Where have
you seen the baby's mother?" "In the next flock." The next flock came. "My
geese, gray geese! Where have you seen the baby's mother?" The baby's mother
jumped to the ground, tore off her goose skin, threw it behind the bush,
nursed the baby at her breast, and said fare well to him: "Tomorrow I will fly
beyond the forests dark, beyond the mountains high!" She gave the baby to the
old man and said: "Why is there a smell of burning?" She turned to put her
goose skin on, and realized that it was gone: Prince Ivan had burned it. He
grasped Princess Maria; she turned into a frog, then into a lizard, and into
one kind of loathsome insect after another, and at last into a spindle. Prince
Ivan broke the spindle in two, threw the top back of him and the bottom in
front of him, and a beautiful young woman stood before him. They went home
together. Yagishna's daughter yelled and shouted: "The wrecker is coming, the
killer is coming!" Prince Ivan gathered the dukes and boyars together and
asked them: "With which wife do you advise me to live?" They said: "With the
first." "Well, gentlemen, whichever wife is the first to climb the gate, with
her will I live." Yagishna's daughter at once climbed to the top of the gate,
but Princess Maria only clutched it and did not climb up. Then Prince Ivan
took his gun and shot the false wife, and began to live with Princess Maria as
of old, and they prospered.

