


In a certain kingdom in a certain land there lived a king who had three sons.
One day they said to him: "Father, our gracious sovereign, give us your
blessing; we wish to go hunting." The father gave them his blessing and they
set out in different directions. The youngest son rode and rode and lost his
way; he came to a clearing, and there lay a dead horse, around which were
gathered beasts of many kinds, birds, and reptiles. A falcon rose, flew up to
the prince, perched on his shoulder, and said: "Prince Ivan, divide that horse
among us; it has lain here for thirty years, and we have been quarreling ever
since, unable to find a way of sharing it." The prince climbed down from his
good steed and divided the carcass: he gave the bones to the beasts, the flesh
to the birds, the skin to the reptiles, and the head to the ants. "Thank you,
Prince Ivan," said the falcon. "For your kindness you shall be able to turn
into a bright falcon or an ant whenever you wish."

Prince Ivan struck the damp earth, turned into a bright falcon, soared up into
the air, and flew to the thrice tenth kingdom. More than half of that kingdom
had been swallowed into a crystal mountain. The prince flew straight into the
royal palace, turned into a goodly youth, and asked the palace guards: "Will
your king take me into his service?" "Why should he not take such a goodly
youth?" they answered. Thus he entered the service of that king and lived in
his palace for one week, then a second, then a third. The king's daughter asked
her father: "Father, my sovereign, give me leave to take a ride with Prince
Ivan to the crystal mountain." The king gave her leave. They mounted good
steeds and set out. When they approached the crystal mountain, a golden goat
jumped suddenly out from nowhere. The prince chased it; he galloped and
galloped, but could not catch the goat, and when he returned the princess had
vanished. What was he to do? How could he dare to appear before the king?

He disguised himself as a very old man, so that he would be unrecognizable,
came to the palace, and said to the king: "Your Majesty, hire me as your
herdsman." "Very well," said the king, "be my herdsman. When the three-headed
dragon comes to your herd, give him three cows; when the six-headed dragon
comes, give him six cows; and when the twelve-headed dragon comes, count off
twelve cows." Prince Ivan drove his herd over mountains and valleys. Suddenly
the three-headed dragon came flying from a lake and said: "Ah, Prince Ivan,
what kind of work are you engaged in? A goodly youth like you should be vying
in combat, not tending cattle. Well, let me have three cows!" "Won't that be
too much?" asked the prince. "I myself eat only one duck a day, and you want
three cows. But you won't get any!" The dragon flew into a rage, and instead
of three cows, seized six. Prince Ivan straightway turned into a bright falcon,
cut off all the three heads of the dragon, and drove the cattle home. "Well,
grandfather," asked the king, "has the three-headed dragon come? Did you give
him three cows?" "No, Your Majesty," replied Prince Ivan, "I did not give him
any."

Next day the prince drove his herd over mountains and valleys, and the six-
headed dragon came from the lake and demanded six cows. "Ah, you gluttonous
monster," said the prince, "I myself eat only one duck a day, and see what you
demand! I won't give you any!" The dragon flew into a rage and instead of six,
seized twelve cows; but the prince turned into a bright falcon, fell upon the
dragon, and cut off his six heads. He drove the herd home and the king asked
him: "Well, grandfather, has the six-headed dragon come? Has my herd grown
much smaller?" "Come he did, but he took nothing," answered the prince.

Late at night Prince Ivan turned into an ant and crawled into the crystal
mountain through a little crack. Lo and behold, the princess was in the
crystal mountain. "Good evening!" said Prince Ivan. "How did you get here?"
"The twelve-headed dragon carried me off," said the princess. "He lives in
father's lake and has a coffer in his side. In this coffer is a hare, in this
hare is a duck, in this duck is an egg, and in this egg is a seed. If you slay
the dragon and get that seed, it will be possible to destroy the crystal
mountain and rescue me."

Prince Ivan crawled out of the mountain, turned again into a herdsman, and
drove his herd. Suddenly the twelve-headed dragon flew up to him and said: "Ah,
Prince Ivan, you are not doing what you should; a goodly youth like you should
be vying in combat, not tending a herd. Well, count off twelve cows for me!"
"That will be too much for you!" said the prince. "I myself eat only one duck
a day, and see what you demand!" They began to fight, and after a long
struggle or a short struggle, Prince Ivan defeated the twelve-headed dragon,
slashed open his trunk, and found the coffer in his right side. In the coffer
he found a hare, in the hare a duck, in the duck an egg, in the egg a seed. He
took the seed, set it alight, and brought it to the crystal mountain, which
soon melted away. Prince Ivan led the princess to her father, who was
overjoyed and said to the prince: "Be my son-in-law!" The wedding was held at
once. I was at that wedding too. I drank beer and mead; they flowed down my
beard but did not go into my mouth.

