


A certain kingdom in a certain land lived Prince Ivan. He had three sisters-
Princess Maria, Princess Olga, and Princess Anna. Their father and mother
died; their parting injunction to their son was: "Whoever woos a sister of
yours, give her to him; do not keep them long with you." The prince buried his
parents and in his sorrow went to walk with his sisters in the green garden.
Suddenly a black cloud covered the sky and a terrible storm gathered. "Let us
go home, sisters," said Prince Ivan. They had no sooner entered the castle
than a thunderbolt struck it. The ceiling was cut in twain and a bright falcon
flew into the room; he struck the floor, turned into a brave knight, and said:
"Hail, Prince Ivan! Formerly I came here as a guest, but now I have come as a
suitor; I want to woo your sister, Princess Maria." "If my sister finds you to
her liking I do not oppose the marriage; let her go with God." Princess Maria
consented; the falcon married her and carried her off to his kingdom.

Days followed days, hours followed hours, and a whole year went by as though
it had never been. Prince Ivan went to walk in the green garden with his two
sisters. Again a great cloud came with whirlwind and lightning. "Let us go
home, sisters," said the prince. They had no sooner entered the castle than a
thunderbolt struck it. The roof fell apart, the ceiling was cut in twain, and
an eagle flew in; he struck the floor and turned into a brave knight. "Hail,
Prince Ivan!" the eagle said. "Formerly I came as a guest but now I have come
as a suitor." And he wooed Princess Olga. Prince Ivan answered: "If Olga finds
you to her liking, let her marry you; I do not oppose her will." Princess Olga
consented and married the eagle; he seized her and carried her off to his
kingdom.

Another year went by. Prince Ivan said to his youngest sister: "Let us go to
walk in the green garden." They walked a while; again a cloud came and a
whirlwind arose and lightning flashed. "Let us return home, sister," said the
prince. They returned home and before they had time to sit down a thunder bolt
struck their palace. The ceiling was cut in twain and a raven flew in. He
struck the floor and turned into a brave knight; the other two were handsome,
but he was even handsomer. "Well, Prince Ivan," said the raven, "formerly I
came as a guest, but now I have come as a suitor: give me Princess Anna in
marriage." "I do not oppose my sister's will," said Ivan. "If she finds you to
her liking, let her marry you." Princess Anna married the raven and he carried
her off to his kingdom. Prince Ivan was left alone; for a whole year he lived
alone, then he became weary. "I will go and look for my sisters," he said.

He made ready, walked and walked, and one day beheld a host of troops lying
slain on the field. Prince Ivan said: "If any man is alive here, let him
answer me. Who slew this great army?" One man answered him: "All this great
army was slain by Maria Morevna, the beautiful queen." Prince Ivan went
farther, came upon white tents, and Maria Morevna, the beautiful queen, came
out to meet him. "Hail, prince," she said. "Whither is God taking you? And is
it of your own will or by compulsion?" Prince Ivan answered her: "Brave
knights do not travel by compulsion." "Well, if you are not in a hurry," said
the queen, "rest in my tents." Maria Morevna found Prince Ivan to her liking
and he married her.

Maria Morevna, the beautiful queen, took Prince Ivan with her to her kingdom.
They lived together for some time, then the queen decided to make war; she
left all her household in Prince Ivan's charge and told him, "Go everywhere,
take care of everything, only never look into this closet." But he could not
restrain himself, as soon as Maria Morevna had gone, he rushed to the closet,
opened the door, looked in. Inside the closet Koshchey the Deathless was
hanging chained with twelve chains. Koshchey begged of Prince Ivan, "Take pity
on me, give me a drink. For ten years I have been tormented here, without food
or drink, my throat is all parched." The prince gave him a whole keg of water;
he drank it and asked for more. "One keg will not quench my thirst," he said.
"Give me another!" The prince gave him another keg of water; Koshchey drank it
and asked for a third, and after he had drunk his third kegful he recovered
his former strength, shook his chains, and broke all twelve of them at once.
"Thanks, Prince Ivan," said Koshchey the Deathless, "now you will never see
Maria Morevna again-not any more than you will see your own ears." And he flew
out of the window in a terrible whirlwind, overtook Maria Morevna, the
beautiful queen, seized her, and carried her off to his house.

Prince Ivan wept bitterly, made ready, and set out on his way to seek her.
"Whatever may befall me, I must find Maria Morevna," he said. He walked one
day, then a second day, and as the third day dawned he beheld a marvelous
castle; near the castle stood an oak, and on the oak sat the bright falcon.
The falcon flew down from the oak, struck the ground, turned into a brave
knight, and exclaimed: "Ah, my dear brother-in-law! How does the Lord favor
you?" Princess Maria ran out, received Prince Ivan with joy, questioned him
about his health, and told him about her own life. The prince stayed with them
for three days and said: "I cannot stay with you a long time, I am looking for
my wife, Maria Morevna, the beautiful queen." "It will be hard for you to find
her," said the falcon. "Leave your silver spoon here in any case; we shall
look at it and remember you." Prince Ivan left his silver spoon with the
falcon and went on his way.

He walked one day, then another day, and as the third day dawned he saw a
castle more magnificent than the first; near the castle stood an oak, and on
the oak sat an eagle. The eagle flew down from the oak, struck the ground,
turned into a brave knight, and exclaimed: "Arise, Princess Olga, our beloved
brother is coming!" Princess Olga straightway ran out to receive Prince Ivan,
embraced and kissed him, questioned him about his health, and told him about
her own life. Prince Ivan stayed with them for three days, and said: "I have
no time to visit longer; I am looking for my wife, Maria Morevna, the
beautiful queen." The eagle said: "It will be hard for you to find her. Leave
your silver fork with us; we shall look at it and remember you." Prince Ivan
left his silver fork and went his way.

He walked one day, then another day, and, as the third day dawned he beheld a
castle even more magnificent than the first two; near the castle stood an oak,
and on the oak sat a raven. The raven flew down from the oak, struck the
ground, turned into a brave knight, and exclaimed: "Princess Anna, come out
quickly, our brother is coming!" Princess Anna ran out, received Prince Ivan
with joy, embraced and kissed him, questioned him about his health, and told
him about her own life. Prince Ivan stayed with them for three days and then
he said: "Farewell! I must go now to look for my wife, Maria Morevna, the
beautiful queen." The raven said: "It will be hard for you to find her. Leave
your silver snuffbox with us; we shall look at it and remember you." The
prince gave them his silver snuffbox, said farewell, and went on his way.

He walked one day, he walked another day, and on the third day came to Maria
Morevna. When she saw her beloved, she threw herself on his neck, shed tears,
and said: "Ah, Prince Ivan, why did you disobey me, why did you look into the
closet and release Koshchey the Deathless?" "Forgive me, Maria Morevna! Do not
recall the past. Instead, come with me while Koshchey is away; perhaps he will
not overtake us." They made ready and left. Koshchey was out hunting; at night
fall he returned home, and his good steed stumbled under him. "Why do you
stumble, hungry jade?" he cried. "Or do you sense some mishap?" The steed
answered: "Prince Ivan was here and has carried off Maria Morevna." "And can
we over take them?" "We could sow wheat, wait till it grows, reap it, thresh
it, grind it into flour, bake five ovenfuls of bread, eat that bread, and
after all that set out in pursuit-and even then we would overtake them."

Koshchey galloped off and overtook Prince Ivan. "Well," he said, "the first
time I forgive you, because of your kindness in having given me water to
drink; the second time I will forgive you too. But the third time, take care-I
will cut you into little pieces." He took Maria Morevna from the prince and
carried her off; and Prince Ivan sat on a stone and wept. He wept and wept,
and went back again for Maria Morevna; Koshchey the Deathless happened to be
away. "Let us go, Maria Morevna!" he said. "Ah, Prince Ivan, he will catch us!"
"Let him catch us; we shall at least have spent an hour or two together." They
made ready and left. As Koshchey the Death less was returning home, his good
steed stumbled under him. "Why do you stumble, hungry jade?" he asked. "Or do
you sense a mishap?" "Prince Ivan was here and has carried off Maria Morevna."
"And can we overtake them?" "We could sow barley, wait till it grows, reap and
thresh it, brew beer, drink ourselves drunk, sleep our fill, and after all
that set out in pursuit-and even then we could overtake them."

Koshchey galloped off and overtook Prince Ivan. "Did I not tell you," he said,
"that you would not see Maria Morevna again-not any more than you can see your
own ears?" And he took the queen and carried her off to his house. Prince Ivan
was left alone; he wept and wept and went back again for Maria Morevna. At
that time also Koshchey happened to be away. "Let us go, Maria Morevna,' the
prince said. "But Prince Ivan, he will catch you and cut you into little
pieces!" "Let him cut me to pieces. I cannot live without you." They made
ready and left. As Koshchey the Deathless was returning home, his good steed
stumbled under him. "Why do you stumble?" he said. "Do you sense some mishap?"
"Prince Ivan was here and has carried off Maria Morevna." Koshchey galloped
off, overtook Prince Ivan, cut him into tiny pieces, and put the pieces in a
tarred barrel; he took the barrel, reinforced it with iron hoops, threw it
into the blue sea, and carried Maria Morevna off to his house.

At that very moment the silver blackened in the castles of Prince Ivan's
brothers-in-law. "Ah," they said, "a misfortune must have happened to our
brother-in-law." The eagle hurried to the blue sea, seized the barrel, and
pulled it ashore, while the falcon flew for the water of life and the raven
for the water of death. All three of them gathered together in one place,
broke the barrel, took out the pieces of Prince Ivan, washed them, and put
them together in the right order. The raven sprinkled them with the water of
death, and the pieces grew together and joined; the falcon sprinkled the body
with the water of life, and Prince Ivan shuddered, rose up, and said: "Ah, how
long I have slept!" "You would have slept even longer had it not been for us,"
said the brothers-in-law. "Now come to visit us." "No, brothers! I shall go to
look for Maria Morevna."

He came to the queen and said: "Find out from Koshchey the Deathless where he
got himself such a good steed." Maria Morevna seized an opportune moment and
began to question Koshchey. He said: "Beyond thrice nine lands, in the thrice
tenth kingdom, beyond a river of fire, lives Baba Yaga; she has a mare on
which she flies around the world every day. She also has many other splendid
mares; I served as her herdsman for three days letting not even one mare go
astray, and as a reward Baba Yaga gave me one colt." "But how did you cross
the river of fire?" "I have a handkerchief of such sort that if I wave it
three times to the right, a very high bridge springs up and the fire cannot
reach it."

Maria Morevna listened to him, carefully repeated everything to Prince Ivan,
stole the handkerchief, and gave it to him. Prince Ivan crossed the river of
fire and went forth to find Baba Yaga. He walked for a long time without
eating or drinking. He happened to come upon a bird from beyond the sea, with
her young. Prince Ivan said: "I shall eat one of your little chicks." "Do not
eat him, Prince Ivan," begged the bird from beyond the sea. "Someday I shall
be useful to you." He went on and saw a beehive in the forest. "I shall take
some honey," he said. The queen bee answered him: "Do not touch my honey,
Prince Ivan; some day I shall be useful to you." He did not touch the honey
and went on. He met a lioness and her whelp. "Let me at least eat this little
lion, I am so hungry that I am sick," he said. "Do not touch him, Prince Ivan,"
the lioness begged. "Some day I shall be useful to you." "Well, so be it."

He plodded on, still hungry; he walked and walked, till he spied the house of
Baba Yaga. Around the house were twelve stakes and on eleven of these stakes
were human heads; only one stake was bare. "Good day, grandmother," said the
prince. "Good day, Prince Ivan! Why have you come-of your own free will or
from need?" "I have come to earn a mighty steed from you." "You may try,
prince. One need not serve a year with me, but only three days. If you can
tend my mares, I will give you a mighty steed; and if you cannot, do not hold
it against me-but your head will go on the last stake." Prince Ivan consented;
Baba Yaga gave him meat and drink and ordered him to set to work. He had no
sooner driven the mares into the field than they raised their tails and
scattered over the meadows; the prince had not even cast a glance about before
they vanished from sight. He wept and was grieved, sat on a stone, and fell
asleep. The sun was setting when the bird from beyond the sea flew to him and
roused him. "Arise, Prince Ivan! The mares have come home." The prince arose,
returned to the house, and found Baba Yaga scolding her mares and crying: "Why
did you come home?" "How could we help coming home?" they replied. "Birds
swarmed up from every corner of the world and almost pecked our eyes out!"
"Well, tomorrow don't run in the meadows, but scatter through deep forests."

Prince Ivan slept that night. In the morning Baba Yaga said to him: "Mind you,
prince, if you do not tend the mares, if you lose even one of them, your rash
head will go on that stake." He drove the mares into the field; they raised
their tails at once and scattered in the deep forests. Again the prince sat on
a stone, wept and wept, and fell asleep. The sun was setting behind the forest
when the lioness ran up to him. "Arise, Prince Ivan!" she said. "The mares are
gathered together." Prince Ivan rose and returned to the house and found Baba
Yaga scolding her mares even more severely than before and crying: "Why did
you return home?" "How could we help going home," they replied, "when wild
beasts came from every corner of the world and almost tore us to pieces!"
"Well, tomorrow you are to run into the blue sea."

Prince Ivan slept again that night; in the morning Baba Yaga sent him to graze
the mares. "If you do not tend them," she said to him, "your rash head will
sit on that stake." He drove the mares into the field; they straightway raised
their tails, vanished from sight, and ran into the blue sea; they stood in the
water up to their necks. Prince Ivan sat on a stone, wept, and fell asleep.
The sun was setting behind the forest when the bee flew up to him and said:
"Arise, prince! All the mares are gathered together. But when you return home,
do not show yourself to Baba Yaga; go to the stable and hide behind the manger.
There you will find a mangy colt wallowing on a dung heap; steal him, and on
the stroke of midnight leave the house." Prince Ivan arose, made his way to
the stable, and hid behind the manger. Baba Yaga scolded her mares and cried:
"Why did you return?" "How could we help returning?" they replied. "An
innumerable host of bees came swarming from every corner of the world and fell
to stinging us till the blood ran all over our sides!"

Baba Yaga fell asleep, and on the stroke of midnight Prince Ivan stole the
mangy colt, saddled him, mounted him, and galloped to the river of fire. When
he came to the river, he waved his handkerchief to the right three times, and
suddenly, as though from nowhere, a high, magnificent bridge hung over the
river. The prince went across the bridge and waved his handkerchief to the
left side only twice, and there remained a thin, very thin bridge above the
river.

Next morning Baba Yaga awoke and found that the mangy colt was gone. She
rushed off in pursuit, galloping in an iron mortar as fast as she could,
urging it on with a pestle, and sweeping her traces with a broom. She
galloped to the river of fire, looked, and thought: "The bridge is good." She
rode on the bridge, and as soon as she reached the middle it broke; and Baba
Yaga fell into the river and died a cruel death. Prince Ivan fed his colt in
the green meadows and it became a marvelous steed. The prince rode to Maria
Morevna. She ran out to meet him, threw herself on his neck, and cried: "How
has God brought you back to life?" "In such and such a way," he said. "Come
with me." "I am afraid, Prince Ivan. If Koshchey catches you, he will again
cut you to pieces." "No, he will not catch me! I now have a magnificent mighty
steed that flies like a bird." They mounted the steed and rode off.

Koshchey the Deathless was returning home and his steed stumbled under him.
"Why do you stumble, you hungry jade?" he cried. "Do you sense a
mishap?" "Prince Ivan was here and has carried off Maria Morevna." "And can we
overtake them?" "God knows! Prince Ivan now has a mighty steed better than
myself." "No, I won't endure this!" said Koshchey the Deathless. "I'll pursue
him!" After a long time or a short time, he caught up with Prince Ivan, jumped
to the ground, and tried to cut him down with his sharp saber. At that moment
Prince Ivan's steed swung a hoof with all his strength and struck Koshchey the
Deathless, smashing his head, and the prince finished him off with his mace.
Thereupon the prince gathered together a pile of wood, made a fire, burned
Koshchey the Deathless, and scattered his ashes to the wind. Maria Morevna sat
on Koshchey's steed, and Prince Ivan on his own, and they went to see first
the raven, then the eagle, and last the falcon. Wherever they went, they were
received with joy. "Ah, Prince Ivan," everyone said, "we had given up hope of
ever seeing you again. Indeed, you have not taken all these pains for nothing;
such a beauty as Maria Morevna could be sought throughout the world, but her
equal could never be found!" They visited and feasted and rode back to their
own kingdom; when they came there, they began to live and prosper and drink
mead.

