


Once upon a time there lived a cat, a sparrow, and a brave youth. The cat and 
the sparrow went to the forest to chop wood and said to the brave youth: "You 
keep the house, but mind you: if Baba Yaga comes and counts the spoons, do not 
say a word, keep quiet!" "Very well," said the brave youth. The cat and the 
sparrow went away, and the brave youth sat on the stove behind the chimney. 
Suddenly Baba Yaga came in, took the spoons, and began to count them: "This is 
the cat's spoon, this is the sparrow's spoon, and this is the brave youth's 
spoon." The brave youth could not restrain himself and cried: "Baba Yaga, 
don't touch my spoon!" Baba Yaga seized the brave youth, sat on the mortar, 
and flew off; she drove the mortar, spurring it with the pestle and sweeping 
away her tracks with her broom. The brave youth shouted: "Cat, run! Sparrow, 
fly!" They heard him and rushed to his help. The cat began to scratch Baba 
Yaga and the sparrow to peck at her; thus they rescued the brave youth.

The next day the cat and the sparrow again prepared to go to the forest to 
chop wood, and told the brave youth: "Mind you, if Baba Yaga comes, do not say 
anything; today we are going far away." As soon as the brave youth had sat 
down on the stove behind the chimney, Baba Yaga came again, and again began to 
count the spoons: "This is the cat's spoon, this is the sparrow's spoon, and 
this is the brave youth's spoon." The brave youth could not restrain himself 
and shouted: "Baba Yaga, don't touch my spoon!" Baba Yaga seized the brave 
youth and dragged him along with her. The brave youth shouted: "Cat, run! 
Sparrow, fly!" They heard him and rushed to his help. The cat began to scratch 
and the sparrow to peck at Baba Yaga. Thus they rescued the brave youth. Then 
they all went home.

The third day the cat and the sparrow prepared once more to go to the forest 
and chop wood, and they said to the brave youth: "Mind you, if Baba Yaga comes, 
be silent; today we are going even farther." The cat and the sparrow left, and 
the brave youth sat on the stove behind the chimney. Suddenly Baba Yaga again 
took the spoons and began to count them: "This is the cat's spoon, this is the 
sparrow's spoon, this is the brave youth's spoon." The brave youth did not say 
a word. Baba Yaga counted again: "This is the cat's spoon, this is the 
sparrow's spoon, and this is the brave youth's spoon." The brave youth did not 
say a word. Baba Yaga counted a third time: "This is the cat's spoon, this is 
the sparrow's spoon, and this is the brave youth's spoon." The brave youth 
could not restrain himself any longer and cried loudly: "Don't touch my spoon!" 
Baba Yaga seized the brave youth and dragged him along with her. He cried: 
"Cat, run! Sparrow, fly!" But his brothers did not hear him. Baba Yaga took 
him home, put him in the wooden shed by the stove, made a fire in the stove, 
and said to her eldest daughter: "I am going to Russia. Meanwhile, roast this 
brave youth for my dinner." "Very well," said the daughter.

The stove grew hot and the girl told the brave youth to come out of the shed. 
He came out. "Lie down on the roasting pan," said the girl. He lay down, held 
up one of his feet so that it touched the ceiling, and put the other on the 
floor. The girl said: "Not that way, not that way!" The brave youth said: "How 
then? Show me." The girl lay down on the roasting pan. The brave youth quickly 
seized an oven fork, pushed the pan with Baba Yaga's daughter on it into the 
oven, and went back into the shed to wait for Baba Yaga. Suddenly she ran in 
and said: "Now I am going to feast and regale myself on the brave youth's 
bones!" The brave youth answered her: "Feast and regale yourself on your own 
daughter's bones!" Baba Yaga was startled and looked into the oven. She found 
her daughter all roasted, and roared: "Aha, you cheat, just wait, you won't 
get away!" She ordered her second daughter to roast the brave youth and went 
away.

Her second daughter made a fire in the stove and told the brave youth to come 
out. He came out, lay on the pan, put one foot on the ceiling and the other on 
the floor. The girl said: "Not that way, not that way!" "Show me how." The 
girl lay on the pan. The brave youth shoved her into the oven, went back to 
the shed, and sat there. Suddenly he heard Baba Yaga crying: "Now I am going 
to feast and regale myself on the brave youth's bones!" He answered: "Feast 
and regale yourself on your own daughter's bones!" Baba Yaga flew into a rage: 
"Eh," she said, "just wait, you won't get away!"

She ordered her youngest daughter to roast him, but to no avail; the brave 
youth shoved her into the oven too. Baba Yaga flew into an even greater rage: 
"Now," she said, "this time I swear you won't get away!" She made a fire in 
the stove and cried: "Come out, brave youth, lie on the pan!" He lay down, 
touched the ceiling with one foot, the floor with the other, and thus could 
not be got into the oven. Baba Yaga said: "Not that way, not that way!" And 
the brave youth still pretended that he did not know how. "I don't know how," 
he said. "Show me." Baba Yaga at once curled up and lay on the pan. The brave 
youth quickly shoved her into the oven, ran home, and said to his brothers: 
"That's what I did with Baba Yaga!"

