


There were once upon a time an old peasant and his wife, and they had three
sons. Two of them were clever young men who could borrow money without being
cheated, but the third was the Fool of the World. He was as simple as a child,
simpler than some children, and he never did anyone a harm in his life.

Well, it always happens like that. The father and mother thought a lot of the
two smart young men; but the Fool of the World was lucky if he got enough to
eat, because they always forgot him unless they happened to be looking at him,
and sometimes even then.

But however it was with his father and mother, this is a story that shows that
God loves simple folk, and turns things to their advantage in the end.

For it happened that the Tzar of that Country sent out messengers along the
highroads and the rivers, even to huts in the forest like ours, to say that he
would give his daughter, the Princess, in marriage to anyone who could bring
him a flying ship, a ship with wings, that should sail this way and that
through the blue sky, like a ship sailing on the sea.

"This is a chance for us," said the two clever brothers; and that same day
they set off together, to see if one of them could not build the flying ship
and marry the Tzar's daughter, and so be a great man indeed.

And their father blessed them, and gave them finer clothes than ever he wore
himself. And their mother made them up hampers of food for the road, soft
white rolls, and several kinds of cooked meats, and bottles of corn brandy.
She went with them as far as the highroad, and waved her hand to them till
they were out of sight. And the two clever brothers set merrily off on their
adventure, to see what could be done with their cleverness. And what happened
to them I do not know, for they were never heard of again.

The Fool of the World saw them set off with their fine parcels of food, and
their fine clothes, and their bottles of corn brandy.

"I'd like to go too," says he, "and eat good meat, with soft white rolls, and
drink corn brandy, and marry the Tzar's daughter."

"Stupid fellow," says his mother, "what's the good of your going? Why, if you
were to stir from the house you would walk into the arms of a bear; and if not
that, then the wolves would eat you before you had finished staring at them."

But the Fool of the World would not be held back by words.

"I am going," says he. "I am going. I am going. I am going."

He went on saying this over and over again, till the old woman his mother saw
there was nothing to be done, and was glad to get him out of the house so as
to be quit of the sound of his voice. So she put some food in a bag for him to
eat by the way. She put in the bag some crusts of dry black bread and a flask
of water. She did not even bother to go as far as the footpath to see him on
his way. She saw the last of him at the door of the hut, and he had not taken
two steps before she had gone back into the hut to see to more important
business.

No matter. The Fool of the World set off with his bag over his shoulder,
singing as he went, for he was off to seek his fortune and marry the Tzar's
daughter. He was sorry his mother had not given him any corn brandy; but he
sang merrily for all that. He would have liked white rolls instead of the dry
black crusts; but, after all, the main thing on a journey is to have something
to eat. So he trudged merrily along the road, and sang because the trees were
green and there was a blue sky overhead.

He had not gone very far when he met an ancient old man with a bent back, and
a long beard, and eyes hidden under his bushy eyebrows.

"Good-day, young fellow," says the ancient old man.

"Good-day, grandfather," says the Fool of the World.

"And where are you off to?" says the ancient old man.

"What!" says the Fool; "haven't you heard? The Tzar is going to give his
daughter to anyone who can bring him a flying ship."

"And you can really make a flying ship?" says the ancient old man.

"No, I do not know how."

"Then what are you going to do?"

"God knows," says the Fool of the World.

"Well," says the ancient, "if things are like that, sit you down here. We will
rest together and have a bite of food. Bring out what you have in your bag."

"I am ashamed to offer you what I have here. It is good enough for me, but it
is not the sort of meal to which one can ask guests."

"Never mind that. Out with it. Let us eat what God has given."

The Fool of the World opened his bag, and could hardly believe his eyes.
Instead of black crusts he saw fresh white rolls and cooked meats. He handed
them out to the ancient, who said, "You see how God loves simple folk.
Although your own mother does not love you, you have not been done out of your
share of the good things. Let's have a sip at the corn brandy.

The Fool of the World opened his flask, and instead of water there came out
corn brandy, and that of the best. So the Fool and the ancient made merry,
eating and drinking; and when they had done, and sung a song or two together,
the ancient says to the Fool:

"Listen to me. Off with you into the forest. Go up to the first big tree you
see. Make the sacred sign of the cross three times before it. Strike it a blow
with your little hatchet. Fall backwards on the ground, and lie there, full
length on your back, until somebody wakes you up. Then you will find the ship
made, all ready to fly. Sit you down in it, and fly off whither you want to go.
But be sure on the way to give a lift to everyone you meet."

The Fool of the World thanked the ancient old man, said good-bye to him, and
went off to the forest. He walked up to a tree, the first big tree he saw,
made the sign of the cross three times before it, swung his hatchet round his
head, struck a mighty blow on the trunk of the tree, instantly fell backwards
flat on the ground, closed his eyes, and went to sleep.

A little time went by, and it seemed to the Fool as he slept that somebody was
jogging his elbow. He woke up and opened his eyes. His hatchet, worn out, lay
beside him. The big tree was gone, and in its place there stood a little ship,
ready and finished. The Fool did not stop to think. He jumped into the ship,
seized the tiller, and sat down. Instantly the ship leapt up into the air, and
sailed away over the tops of the trees.

The little ship answered the tiller as readily as if she were sailing in water,
and the Fool steered for the highroad, and sailed along above it, for he was
afraid of losing his way if he tried to steer a course across the open country.

He flew on and on, and looked down, and saw a man lying in the road below him
with his ear on the damp ground.

"Good-day to you, uncle," cried the Fool.

"Good-day to you, Sky-fellow," cried the man.

"What are you doing down there?" says the Fool.

"I am listening to all that is being done in the world."

"Take your place in the ship with me." The man was willing enough, and sat
down in the ship with the Fool, and they flew on together singing songs.

They flew on and on, and looked down, and there was a man on one leg, with the
other tied up to his head.

"Good-day, uncle," says the Fool, bringing the ship to the ground. "Why are
you hopping along on one foot?"

"If I were to untie the other I should move too fast. I should be stepping
across the world in a single stride."

"Sit down with us," says the Fool.

The man sat down with them in the ship, and they flew on together singing
songs.

They flew on and on, and looked down, and there was a man with a gun, and he
was faking aim, but what he was aiming at they could not see.

"Good health to you, uncle," says the Fool. "But what are you shooting at?
There isn't a bird to be seen."

"What!" says the man. "If there were a bird that you could see, I should not
shoot at it. A bird or a beast a thousand versts away, that's the sort of mark
for me."

"Take your seat with us," says the Fool.

The man sat down with them in the ship, and they flew on together. Louder and
louder rose their songs.

They flew on and on, and looked down, and there was a man carrying a sack full
of bread on his back.

"Good health to you, uncle," says the Fool, sailing down. "And where are you
off to?"

"I am going to get bread for my dinner."

"But you've got a full sack on your back."

"That-that little scrap! Why, that's not enough for a single mouthful."

"Take your seat with us," says the Fool.

The Eater sat down with them in the ship, and they flew on together singing
louder than ever.

They flew on and on, and looked down, and there was a man walking round and
round a lake.

"Good health to you, uncle," says the Fool. "What are you looking for?"

"I want a drink, and I can't find any water."

"But there's a whole lake in front of your eyes. Why can't you take a drink
from that?"

"That little drop!" says the man. "Why, there's not enough water there to wet
the back of my throat if I were to drink it at one gulp."

"Take your seat with us," says the Fool.

The Drinker sat down with them, and again they flew on, singing in chorus.

They flew on and on, and looked down, and there was a man walking towards the
forest, with a fagot of wood on his shoulders.

"Good-day to you, uncle," says the Fool. "Why are you taking wood to the
forest?"

"This isn't simple wood," says the man.

"What is it, then?" says the Fool.

"If it is scattered about, a whole army of soldiers leaps up out of the
ground."

"There's a place for you with us," says the Fool.

The man sat down with them, and the ship rose up into the air, and flew on,
carrying its singing crew.

They flew on and on, and looked down, and there was a man carrying a sack of
straw.

"Good health to you, uncle," says the Fool; "and where are you taking your
straw?"

"To the village."

"Why, are they short of straw in your village?

"No; but this is such straw that if you scatter it abroad in the very hottest
of the summer, instantly the weather turns cold, and there is snow and frost."

"There's a place here for you too," says the Fool.

"Very kind of you," says the man, and steps in and sits down, and away they
all sail together, singing like to burst their lungs.

They did not meet any one else, and presently came flying up to the palace of
the Tzar. They flew down and cast anchor in the courtyard.

Just then the Tzar was eating his dinner. He heard their loud singing, and
looked out of the window and saw the ship come sailing down into his courtyard.
He sent his servant out to ask who was the great prince who had brought him
the flying ship, and had come sailing down with such a merry noise of singing.

The servant came up to the ship, and saw the Fool of the World and his
companions sitting there cracking jokes. He saw they were all moujiks, simple
peasants, sitting in the ship; so he did not stop to ask questions, but came
back quietly and told the Tzar that there were no gentlemen in the ship at all,
but only a lot of dirty peasants.

Now the Tzar was not at all pleased with the idea of giving his only daughter
in marriage to a simple peasant, and he began to think how he could get out of
his bargain. Thinks he to himself, "I'll set them such tasks that they will
not be able to perform, and they'll be glad to get off with their lives, and I
shall get the ship for nothing."

So he told his servant to go to the Fool and tell him that before the Tzar had
finished his dinner the Fool was to bring him some of the magical water of
life.

Now, while the Tzar was giving this order to his servant, the Listener, the
first of the Fool's companions, was listening, and heard the words of the Tzar
and repeated them to the Fool.

"What am I to do now?" says the Fool, stopping short in his jokes. "In a year,
in a whole century, I never could find that water. And he wants it before he
has finished his dinner."

"Don't you worry about that," says the Swift-goer, "I'll deal with that for
you."

The servant came and announced the Tzar's command.

"Tell him he shall have it," says the Fool.

His companion, the Swift-goer, untied his foot from beside his head, put it to
the ground, wriggled it a little to get the stiffness out of it, ran off and
was out of sight almost before he had stepped from the ship. Quicker than I
can tell it you in words he had come to the water of life, and put some of it
in a bottle.

"I shall have plenty of time to get back," thinks he, and down he sits under a
windmill and goes off to sleep.

The royal dinner was coming to an end, and there wasn't a sign of him. There
were no songs and no jokes in the flying ship. Everybody was watching for the
Swift-goer, and thinking he would not be in time.

The Listener jumped out and laid his right ear to the damp ground, listened a
moment, and said, "What a fellow! He has gone to sleep under the windmill. I
can hear him snoring. And there is a fly buzzing with its wings, perched on
the windmill close above his head."

"This is my affair," says the Far-shooter, and he picked up his gun from
between his knees, aimed at the fly on the windmill, and woke the Swift-goer
with the thud of the bullet on the wood of the mill close by his head. The
Swift-goer leapt up and ran, and in less than a second had brought the magic
water of life and given it to the Fool. The Fool gave it to the servant, who
took it to the Tzar. The Tzar had not yet left the table, so that his command
had been fulfilled as exactly as ever could be.

"What fellows these peasants are," thought the Tzar. "There is nothing for it
but to set them another task." So the Tzar said to his servant, "Go to the
captain of the flying ship and give him this message: 'If you are such a
cunning fellow, you must have a good appetite. Let you and your companions eat
at a single meal twelve oxen roasted whole, and as much bread as can be baked
in forty ovens!'"

The Listener heard the message, and told the Fool what was coming. The Fool
was terrified, and said, "I can't get through even a single loaf at a
sitting."

"Don't worry about that," said the Eater. "It won't be more than a mouthful
for me, and I shall be glad to have a little snack in place of my dinner.

The servant came, and announced the Tzar's Command

"Good," says the Fool. "Send the food along, and we'll know what to do with
it."

So they brought twelve Oxen roasted whole, and as much bread as could be baked
in forty ovens, and the companions had scarcely sat down to the meal before
the Eater had finished the lot.

"Why," said the Eater, "what a little! They might have given us a decent meal
while they were about it."

The Tzar told his servant to tell the Fool that he and his companions were to
drink forty barrels of wine, with forty bucketfuls in every barrel.

The Listener told the Fool what message was coming.

"Why," says the Fool, "I never in my life drank more than one bucket at a
time."

"Don't worry," says the Drinker. "You forget that I am thirsty. It'll be
nothing of a drink for me."

They brought the forty barrels of wine, and tapped them, and the Drinker
tossed them down one after another, one gulp for each barrel. "Little enough,"
says he. "Why, I am thirsty still."

"Very good," says the Tzar to his servant, when he heard that they had eaten
all the food and drunk all the wine. "Tell the fellow to get ready for the
wedding, and let him go and bathe himself in the bath-house. But let the bath
house be made so hot that the man will stifle and frizzle as soon as he sets
foot inside. It is an iron bath-house. Let it be made red hot."

The Listener heard all this and told the Fool, who stopped short with his
mouth open in the middle of a joke.

"Don't you worry," says the moujik with the straw.

Well, they made the bath-house red hot, and called the Fool, and the Fool went
along to the bath-house to wash himself, and with him went the moujik with the
straw.

They shut them both into the bath-house, and thought that that was the end of
them. But the moujik scattered his straw before them as they went in, and it
became so cold in there that the Fool of the World had scarcely time to wash
himself before the water in the cauldrons froze to solid ice. They lay down on
the very stove itself, and spent the night there shivering.

In the morning the servants opened the bathhouse and there were the Fool of
the World and the moujik, alive and well, lying on the stove and singing songs.

They told the Tzar, and the Tzar raged with anger. "There is no getting rid of
this fellow," says he. "But go and tell him that I send him this message 'If
you are to marry my daughter, you must show that you are able to defend her.
Let me see that you have at least a regiment of soldiers.'" Thinks he to
himself, "How can a simple peasant raise a troop? He will find it hard enough
to raise a single soldier."

The Listener told the Fool of the World, and the Fool began to lament. "This
time," says he, "I am done indeed. You, my brothers, have saved me from
misfortune more than once, but this time, alas, there is nothing to be done."

"Oh, what a fellow you are!" says the peasant with the fagot of wood. "I
suppose you've forgotten about me. Remember that I am the man for this little
affair, and don't you worry about it at all."

The Tzar's servant came along and gave his message.

"Very good," says the Fool; "but tell the Tzar that if after this he puts me
off again, I'll make war on his Country, and take the Princess by force."

And then, as the servant went back with the message, the whole crew on the
flying ship set to their singing again, and sang and laughed and made jokes as
if they had not a care in the world.

During the night, while the others slept, the peasant with the fagot of wood
went hither and thither, scattering his sticks. Instantly where they fell
there appeared a gigantic army. Nobody could count the number of soldiers in
it-cavalry, foot soldiers, yes, and guns, and all the guns new and bright, and
the men in the finest uniforms that ever were seen.

In the morning, as the Tzar woke and looked from the windows of the palace, he
found himself surrounded by troops upon troops of soldiers, and generals In
cocked hats bowing in the court yard and taking orders from the Fool of the
World, who sat there joking with his companions in the flying ship. Now it was
the Tzar's turn to be afraid. As quickly as he could he sent his servants to
the Fool with presents of rich jewels and fine clothes, invited him to come to
the palace, and begged him to marry the Princess.

The Fool of the World put on the fine clothes, and stood there as handsome a
young man as a princess could wish for a husband. He presented himself before
the Tzar, fell in love with the Princess and she with him, married her the
same day, received with her a rich dowry, and became so clever that all the
court repeated everything he said. The Tzar and the Tzaritza liked him very
much, and as for the Princess, she loved him to distraction.

