


In a certain kingdom, in a certain land, there lived a king with his queen;
they had no children, and after they had lived ten years together, the king
issued a call to all the kings, all the cities, all the nations, and even to
the common people, asking who could cure the queen of her barrenness and make
her bear a child. Princes and boyars, wealthy merchants and peasants, gathered
in the king's palace; he gave them meat and drink till they were drunk and
then began to question them. But no one knew. No one could say how the queen
might be made to bear a child - no one, except the son of a peasant. The king
gave him a handful of gold coins and told him that in three days he must give
the answer.

Well, although the son of the peasant had undertaken to cure the queen, he had
not even dreamed of what he should suggest; so he went outside the town and
began to ponder deeply. He met an old woman who said: "Tell me, peasant lad,
what are you thinking about?" He answered her: "Be quiet, old hag, don't annoy
me!" But she ran after him and said: "Tell me your secret thoughts; I am old,
I know everything." He thought that perhaps he had been wrong in offending her,
that perhaps she really knew something, and said: "Little grandmother, I
undertook to tell the king how the queen might be made to bear a child, but I
do not know it myself." "Oho! But I know! Go to the king and tell him to have
three silken nets prepared. In the sea beneath the king's window there is a
pike with golden wings, which always swims in front of the palace. When the
king catches the pike and cooks it, and the queen eats of it, she will bear a
child."

The young peasant himself then went to fish in the sea. When he cast in the
three silken nets, the pike leaped out, tearing all three nets. He cast in the
nets for the second time, and again the pike tore them. Then the young peasant
took his belt and the silken kerchief from his neck, tied up the nets, and
cast them in for the third time. This time he caught the pike with the golden
wings; he was overjoyed and brought it to the king. The king ordered the pike
to be washed, cleaned, fried, and served to the queen. The cooks washed and
cleaned the fish and threw the entrails out of the window. A cow swallowed
these entrails. As soon as the cooks had fried the pike, a scullery maid put
it on a dish, took it to the queen, and on the way tore off a wing and tasted
it. Thus all three of them-the cow, the scullery maid, and the queen - became
pregnant on the same day, at the same hour.

Speedily a tale is spun, with much less speed a deed is done. After some time
the dairymaid came out of the cattle shed and reported to the king that a cow
had given birth to a human babe. The king was very much surprised; and he had
no sooner heard this news than he was told that the scullery maid had given
birth to a boy exactly like the cow's son. And a few minutes later it was
reported to him that the queen had given birth to a son as like the cow's son
as one pea is like another. They were all wonderful boys! They grew by the
hour as other boys grow by the year; in one hour they were as others in one
year; in three hours, they were as others in three years. When they came of
age, they sensed in themselves a mighty and heroic strength; they came to
their father, the king, and asked his permission to go to the town, to see
people, and show themselves to the world. He granted them permission, told
them to behave soberly and peaceably, and gave them as much money as they
could carry.

And so the good youths set out. One was called Ivan the Prince, the other Ivan
the Scullery Maid's Son, and the third Ivan the Cow's Son, and nicknamed also
Buria Bogatyr, Champion of Champions. And they walked and walked, but did not
buy anything. Then Ivan the Prince saw some glass balls and said to his
brothers: "Brothers, let us each buy a ball and throw it upward; whoever
throws it highest will be our eldest." The brothers agreed and cast lots as to
who should throw first. The lots fell out in favor of Ivan the Prince. He
threw high, but Ivan the Scullery Maid's Son threw still higher, and Buria
Bogatyr threw the ball so high that it vanished from sight, and he said:
"Henceforth I am your eldest!" Ivan the Prince grew angry. "What do you mean?"
he said. "You are the cow's son, yet you want to be our eldest!" Ivan the
Cow's Son answered him: "It must be God's will that you should obey me."

They set out on the road and came to the Black Sea; in it the sea serpent was
wallowing. Ivan the Prince said: "Brothers, whoever of us subdues this serpent,
he will be our eldest." The brothers consented. Ivan the Cow's Son said:
"Subdue him, Prince Ivan! If you succeed, you will be our eldest." Prince Ivan
began to shout in order to subdue the serpent, but the serpent only grew more
ferocious. Then Ivan the Scullery Maid's Son tried to subdue him, but failed
also. Then Buria Bogatyr shouted and threw a stick into the water, and the
serpent vanished in a trice. He said again: "I am your eldest." Price Ivan
grew angry and said: "We do not want to be the inferior brothers!" "Then I
shall leave you," said Ivan the Cow's Son, and he returned to his native land.
The two brothers went on straight ahead.

When the king learned that Ivan the Cow's Son had returned alone, he ordered
him to be imprisoned in a fortress; for three days he was not given any food
or drink. The mighty champion knocked with his fist on the stone wall and
shouted in a mighty voice: "Ask your king and my foster father why he does not
feed me! Your walls and bars are no bars to me. If I want to, I can smash them
all with my fist." This was straight-way reported to the king. The king came
to him and said:"What are you bragging about, Buria Bogatyr?" "My foster
father, why do you not feed me, why have you starved me for three days? I have
not committed any misdeed." "But what have you done with my sons, your
brothers?" Ivan the Cow's Son told him everything that had happened. "My
brothers are alive," he said. "They are safe and sound and went straight
ahead." The king asked: "Why did you not go with them?" "Because Prince Ivan
wants to be the eldest, although the lots fell out making me the eldest."
"Very well then, I will send for them." Ivan the Cow's Son said: "No one
except myself can overtake them, for they went to the land of the dragons, to
the place where dragons with six, nine, and twelve heads come up from the
Black Sea." The king begged him to go after them. Ivan the Cow's Son made
ready for his journey, took his battle mace and his steel sword, and left.

Speedily a tale is spun, with much less speed a deed is done. Ivan the Cow's
Son walked and walked, and finally overtook his brothers near the Black Sea,
near the white hazelwood bridge; and by that bridge there stood a post, and on
it was written that this was the place where the three dragons always come out
of the sea. "Good day, brothers!" he said to his brothers. They were overjoyed
to see him and said: "Good day, Ivan the Cow's Son, our eldest brother." And
he said: "I see that what is written on the post is not to your taste." He
looked around and near the bridge he saw a little hut on chicken legs and with
a cock's head, turned with its front to the wood and its back to them. Ivan
the Cow's Son cried: "Little hut, little hut, stand with thy back to the wood,
and thy front to us!" The little hut turned around; they entered it and found
that the table was set with meat and drink in abundance; in the corner stood a
bed of timber and on it lay a featherbed of down. Buria Bogatyr said: "You see,
brothers, without me you would not have had any of this."

They sat down and dined, then lay down to rest. When they arose, Ivan the
Cow's Son said: "Brothers, tonight the six-headed dragon will come out of the
sea; let us cast lots as to who shall stand guard." They cast lots and the
task fell to Ivan the Scullery Maid's Son. The Cow's Son said to him: "Mind
you, a little pitcher will jump out of the sea and begin to dance before you;
do not look at it, just spit at it and smash it." When the Scullery Maid's Son
came to the sea he fell asleep. But Buria Bogatyr, knowing that his brothers
were unreliable, went out himself; he walked on the bridge, tapping from time
to time with his stick.

Suddenly a little pitcher jumped up before him and began to dance; the Cow's
Son spat upon it and smashed it to smithereens. Then a duck quacked, the earth
opened, the sea surged up, and out of the waves crawled Chudo Yudo, a sea
monster. It was the six-headed dragon. He whistled and shouted with a mighty
hiss, in a truly powerful voice: "Magic steed, horse of my need! Stand before
me as leaf before grass!" The steed ran out, the earth shook, whole hayricks
flew from under his hoofs, from his ears and nostrils thick smoke rolled.
Chudo Yudo mounted the horse and rode toward the white hazelwood bridge.
Suddenly his steed stumbled under him. "Why do you stumble, carrion flesh?"
the dragon asked. "Do you scent a friend or an enemy?" The good steed
answered: "There is an enemy - Ivan the Cow's Son." "You lie, carrion flesh!
Even his bones were not brought here by a raven in a bladder, and he himself
is certainly not here." "Ah, Chudo Yudo," said Buria Bogatyr, "no raven has
brought my bones. I walked here myself." The dragon asked him: "Why have you
come? To woo my sisters or daughters?" "No, brother, I came to meet you in the
field, not to become your kin. Let us fight!"

Buria Bogatyr swung his battle mace and cut off three of the dragon's heads;
he swung again, and cut off the other three. He cut the dragon's trunk in
pieces and cast them into the sea, hid the heads under the white hazelwood
bridge, tied the horse to the legs of Ivan the Scullery Maid's Son, and put
the steel sword by his head; he himself went back to the little hut and lay
down to sleep as though nothing had happened. Ivan the Scullery Maid's Son
awoke, saw the steed, and was overjoyed; he sat upon him, rode to the little
hut, and cried: "Buria Bogatyr, you told me not to look at the pitcher, but I
did look, and the Lord gave me this steed." Ivan the Cow's Son answered: "He
has given you the steed, but promised us more."

The next night it fell to Prince Ivan's lot to stand guard. Buria Bogatyr told
him the same thing about the pitcher. The prince began to walk on the bridge
and to tap with his walking stick; the little pitcher jumped out and danced
before him; he stared at it and fell sound asleep. But Ivan the Cow's Son, not
relying upon his brother, went out himself; he walked on the bridge and tapped
with his walking stick; the little pitcher jumped out and danced before him.
Ivan the Cow's Son spat upon it and smashed it to smithereens. Suddenly a duck
quacked, the earth opened, the sea surged up, and out of the waves crawled
Chudo Yudo, a sea monster, and whistled and shouted with a mighty hiss, in a
truly powerful voice: "Magic steed, horse of my need, stand before me as leaf
before grass!" The steed ran out, the earth shook; from his ears and nostrils
rolled pillars of smoke, from his mouth a flame streamed; he stood before the
dragon, rooted to the spot. Chudo Yudo the nine-headed dragon sat upon him and
rode to the white hazelwood bridge; as he rode upon the bridge, the steed
stumbled under him. Chudo Yudo smote him on his great flanks: "Why do you
stumble, carrion flesh? Do you scent a friend or an enemy?" "There is our
enemy, Ivan the Cow's Son!" "You lie! Even his bones were not brought here by
a raven in a bladder, and he himself is certainly not here." "Ah, Chudo Yudo,
sea monster," answered Ivan the Cow's Son, "I have been walking here for two
years." "Well, Ivan, Cow's Son, have you come to woo my sisters or my
daughters?" "I have come to meet you in the field, not to be your kin; let us
join in combat."

Ivan the Cow's Son swung his battle mace and cut off three of the dragon's
heads as easily as if they had been cabbage heads; he swung again and cut off
three more heads; he swung a third time and cut off the rest. He chopped the
trunk into pieces and cast them into the Black Sea, hid the heads under the
white hazelwood bridge, tied the steed to Prince Ivan's legs, and put the
steel sword by his head; he himself went back to the little hut and lay down
to sleep as though nothing had happened. Next morning Prince Ivan awoke, saw a
steed even better than the first one, was overjoyed, rode on him, and cried:
"Eli, Ivan the Cow's Son, you told me not to look at the little pitcher, but
God has given me a steed even better than the first one." He answered: "God
has given you two steeds, and to me only a promise."

The third night was approaching and Buria Bogatyr, Champion of Champions, made
ready to stand guard; he set up a table and lit a candle, thrust a knife into
the wall, hung a towel on it, gave his brothers a pack of cards, and said:
"Play cards, boys, and do not forget me; when the candle begins to rim out,
and when blood drips from this towel onto the dish, hasten to the bridge to
aid me."

Buria Bogatyr walked on the bridge, tapping with his walking stick; a little
pitcher jumped out and danced before him; he spat upon it and smashed it to
smithereens. Suddenly a duck quacked, the earth opened, the sea surged up, and
out of the waves crawled Chudo Yudo the sea monster; this time it was the
twelve-headed dragon. He whistled and shouted with a mighty hiss, in a truly
powerful voice: "Magic steed, horse of my need, stand before me as leaf before
grass!" The steed ran out, the earth shook; from his ears and nostrils rolled
pillars of smoke, from his mouth a fiery flame streamed; he ran to the dragon
and stood rooted to the spot. Chudo Yudo sat upon him and rode to the bridge;
when the steed stepped upon the bridge he stumbled. "Why do you stumble,
carrion flesh? Do you scent an enemy?" the dragon cried. "There is an enemy of
ours, Buria Bogatyr, the Cow's Son." "Be quiet; the raven has not brought his
bones here in a bladder." "You lie, sea monster, I have been walking here for
three years." "Well, Buria Bogatyr, do you want to marry my sisters or my
daughters?" "I have come to fight you in the field, not to be your kin; let us
join in combat." "Ah, you killed my two brothers, so you think you can defeat
me too!" "We shall see what God's will is. Now listen, Chudo Yudo, you have a
horse and I am on foot; let us agree that if either of us falls to the ground
the other must not strike him."

Buria Bogatyr swung his battle mace and cut off three of the dragon's heads in
one stroke; he swung again, and the dragon knocked him down. Cried Ivan the
Cow's Son: "Halt, Chudo Yudo! Our agreement was not to strike a man while he
lay on the ground." Chudo Yudo let him get up; he rose, and at once three
heads flew like so many cabbage heads. They began to struggle bitterly; they
fought for several hours, till both grew exhausted; the dragon lost three more
heads and our hero's battle mace broke. Buria Bogatyr removed his left boot,
flung it into the little hut, and knocked down half of it; but his brothers
were asleep and did not hear him. He removed his right boot and flung it also;
the little hut flew apart into boards, but still his brothers did not awaken.
Buria Bogatyr took a fragment of his mace, hurled it at the stable where their
two horses stood, and broke the stable door; the horses galloped onto the
bridge and unsaddled the dragon. Our hero was overjoyed, ran up to the dragon,
and cut off his remaining three heads. He chopped the dragon's body into
pieces, cast them into the Black Sea, and stuck the heads under the white
hazelwood bridge. Then he took the three horses, led them into the stable, and
hid under the bridge without wiping the blood off it.

In the morning his two brothers awoke and saw that the hut had crumbled to
bits and that the dish was full of blood; they went to the stable and found
three horses; they wondered what had happened to their eldest brother. They
sought him for three days but did not find him. They said: "They must have
killed each other, and their bodies have vanished; let us go home." They had
saddled their horses and were making ready to go when Buria Bogatyr awoke and
came out from under the bridge. "So you are deserting your companion,
brothers?" he said. "I saved you from death, but you were asleep and did not
come to my aid." Then they fell on their knees before him and said: "Forgive
us, Buria Bogatyr, our eldest brother!" "God will forgive you!" He murmured
over the little hut: "Be as thou wert before!" The little hut reappeared just
as it was before, full of meat and drink. "Now, brothers," said Ivan the Cow's
Son, "dine, for without me you might have starved to death; then we shall set
out."

They dined and set out on their way. When they had gone two versts, Buria
Bogatyr said: "Brothers, I forgot my riding crop in the little hut. Amble
along while I go back to fetch it." He rode to the little hut, climbed down
from his steed, and set him free in the sacred meadows, saying: "Go, my good
steed, until I call thee!" Then he changed himself into a fly, flew into the
little hut, and sat on the stove. After a while, Baba Yaga came in and sat
down in the front corner. Her young daughter-in-law came to see her and said:
"Ah, mother, Buria Bogatyr - Ivan the Cow's Son - has killed your son, my
husband. But I will revenge myself for this insult: I will precede him, send
upon him a hot day, and turn myself into a green meadow. In this green meadow
I will turn into a well. In this well a silver cup will float. And I will also
turn myself into a timber bed. The brothers will want to feed their horses, to
rest and drink water; and then they will be blown to bits like poppy seed."
Her mother said to her: "That is what those evildoers deserve!"

Then her second daughter-in-law came and said: "Ah, mother, Buria Bogatyr -
Ivan the Cow's Son - has killed your son, my husband. But I will revenge
myself for this insult: I will precede him and turn into a lovely garden;
fruits of every description will hang above the fence, juicy and fragrant!
They will want to pick them, each his favorite fruit; and then they will be
blown to bits like poppy seed!" Her mother said: "You, too, have thought up a
good revenge!"

The third and youngest daughter-in-law came and said: mother, Buria Bogatyr -
Ivan the Cow's Son - has killed your son, my husband. But I will revenge
myself for this insult: I will turn into a little old hut. They will want to
spend the night in it, but as soon as they set foot inside they will be blown
to bits like poppy seeds." "Well, my beloved daughters-in-law, if you fail to
kill them yourselves, I will run in front of them tomorrow, turn into a sow,
and swallow them all."

Buria Bogatyr heard these words while sitting on the stove and then flew
outside. He struck the earth and turned into a good youth. He whistled and
shouted, with a mighty whistle, a powerful cry: "Magic steed, horse of my need,
stand before me as leaf before grass!" The steed ran out; the earth shook.
Buria Bogatyr sat upon him and rode on; he tied a wisp of bast to a stick,
overtook his companions, and said to them: "Here, my brothers, I cannot live
without such a riding crop!" "Eh, brother, was it worthwhile to return for
such trash? We could have gone to town and bought a new one." And they rode on
over steppes and through valleys; and the day was so hot that they could not
bear it, and thirst tormented them. They came upon a green meadow, and in the
meadow the grass was lush, and on the grass there was a timber bed. "Brother
Buria Bogatyr," the younger two said, "let us feed our horses on this grass
and rest ourselves on the timber bed; there is also a well, let us drink of
the cool water." Buria Bogatyr said to his brothers: "The well is amidst the
steppes and deserts; no one shall take water or drink from it." He jumped down
from his good steed, began to smite and cut the well, and blood spattered out;
suddenly the day became misty, the heat subsided, and they were not thirsty.
"Now you see, brothers," he said, "how stale this water is; it is like blood."

They rode on farther. After a long time or a short time, they came to a
beautiful garden. Prince Ivan said to the eldest brother: "Allow us each to
pick an apple." "Eh, brothers, this garden is amidst steppes and deserts;
perhaps the apples are old and rotten, and if you eat them a disease may
strike you. First let me see." He went into the garden and began to smite and
cut; he cut down all the trees, down to the last one. His brothers became
angry at him for not doing what they wanted.

They rode along and were overtaken by dark night; soon they came to a hut.
"Brother Buria Bogatyr," the younger brothers said, "rain is beginning to
fall; let us spend the night in this hut." "Eh, brothers, let us pitch our
tents and spend the night in the open field rather than in this hut; it is an
old hut, and if we enter, it may fall and crush us; let me go and see." He
entered the hut and began to cut it down; blood spattered out, and he said:
"You can see for yourselves what kind of hut this is, rotten through and
through! Let us ride on farther." The brothers grumbled but did not show their
anger. They rode on farther; suddenly the path branched into two. Buria
Bogatyr said: "Brothers, let us take the left path." They said: "Take the path
you want, we shall not go with you." And so they turned to the right and Buria
Bogatyr to the left.

Buria Bogatyr - Ivan the Cow's Son - came to a village; in this village twelve
blacksmiths were working. And he cried and whistled, with a mighty whistle, a
powerful cry: "Blacksmiths, blacksmiths, all of you come here!" The
blacksmiths heard him and twelve of them ran to him: "What do you wish?"
"Stretch an iron sheet around the smithy." In a trice they did it. "Forge
twelve iron rods, blacksmiths, and heat the tongs red hot. A sow will come to
you and say: 'Blacksmiths, blacksmiths, surrender the culprit; if you do not
surrender the culprit, I will swallow you all with the smithy.' And you say:
'Ah, mother sow, take this fool from us, he has long been a thorn in our
flesh; only thrust your tongue into the smithy, and we will put him on your
tongue.'"

Buria Bogatyr had no sooner given them this order than a huge sow came to them
and cried in a loud voice: "Blacksmiths, blacksmiths, surrender the culprit!"
The blacksmiths answered in one voice: "Mother sow, take this fool from us, he
has long been a thorn in our flesh; only thrust your tongue into the smithy:
we will put him on your tongue." The sow was simple minded and gullible, she
thrust her tongue in a whole cubit's length. Buria Bogatyr seized it with the
red-hot tongs and cried to the blacksmiths: "Take the iron rods, thrash her
soundly!" They thrashed her until they bared her ribs. "And now," said Buria
Bogatyr, "hold her fast, I will give her a treat." He seized an iron rod and
smote her, breaking all her ribs in two. The sow began to implore him: "Buria
Bogatyr, let my soul repent!" Buria Bogatyr said: "And why have you swallowed
my brothers?" "I will throw them up at once." He seized her by her ears; the
sow vomited and the two brothers jumped out with their steeds. Then Buria
Bogatyr raised her and with all his strength smashed her against the damp
earth: the sow shattered into a myriad of evil spirits. Said Buria Bogatyr to
his brothers: "Do you see, you fools, where you have been?" They fell on their
knees begging: "Forgive us, Buria Bogatyr, Cow's Son!" "Well, now let us set
out on our way. Nothing shall stop us."

They came to a kingdom, to the Indian king, and pitched their tents in his
sacred meadows. In the morning the king awoke, looked through his spyglass,
saw the tents, and summoned his prime minister, saying: "Go, brother, take a
horse from the stable, ride to the sacred meadows, and find out what uncouth
people have come there, pitched their tents without my permission, and made
fires in my sacred meadows." The prime minister went to the brothers and
asked: "What kind of people are you, kings or princes, or mighty champions?"
Buria Bogatyr, the Cow's Son, answered: "We are very mighty champions, we have
come to woo the king's daughter. Report to your king that he must give his
daughter to Prince Ivan in marriage; and if he refuses, let him send an army."
The king asked his daughter whether she would marry Prince Ivan. She answered:
"No, father, I do not want to marry him; send an army." Straightway the bugles
blew, the cymbals clashed, the troops gathered and went to the sacred meadows;
and it was such a big host that Prince Ivan and Ivan the Scullery Maid's Son
took fright.

At that moment Buria Bogatyr was cooking some gruel for breakfast and stirring
it with a ladle; he went out and with one swing of the ladle knocked down half
the army; he went back, stirred his gruel, went out, swung again, and knocked
down the other half, leaving only a one-eyed man and a blind man. "Tell your
king," he said to them, "that he must give his daughter Princess Maria to
Prince Ivan in marriage; and if he refuses, let him send another army, and
come with it himself." The one-eyed man and the blind man came to their king
and said: "Your Majesty, Buria Bogatyr sent us to tell you that you must give
your daughter to Prince Ivan in marriage; and he was frightfully angry, and
slew all our troops with a ladle." The king entreated his daughter: "My
beloved daughter, please marry Prince Ivan." The daughter said: "We have no
choice, I must marry him. Have a carriage sent for him."

The king forthwith sent a carriage and stood waiting before the gate. Prince
Ivan came with his two brothers; the king received them courteously and kindly,
with music and drums, and seated them at oaken tables covered with checkered
table cloths, on which were placed sweet viands and heady drinks. Then Buria
Bogatyr whispered to Prince Ivan: "Mind you, Prince Ivan, when the princess
asks you for permission to leave for an hour, say to her: 'You may go even for
two hours.'" After a while, the princess came to Prince Ivan and said: "Prince
Ivan, permit me to go to another room to change my dress." Prince Ivan let her
go; she went out of the chambers and Buria Bogatyr followed behind her quietly.
The princess struck herself against the porch, turned into a gull, and flew
out to sea. Buria Bogatyr struck the ground, turned into a falcon, and flew
after her. The princess came to the seashore, struck the ground, turned into a
lovely maiden, and said: "Grandfather, grandfather, golden head, silver beard,
let me speak to you!" Her grandfather emerged from the blue sea and said: "My
little granddaughter, what do you want?" "Prince Ivan is wooing me; I do not
wish to marry him, but all our army is slain. Grandfather, give me three hairs
from your head; I will show them to Prince Ivan and ask him to guess from what
root comes this grass."

The grandfather gave her three hairs; she struck the ground, turned into a
gull, and flew home. And Buria Bogatyr struck the ground, turned into the same
lovely maiden, and said: "Grandfather, grandfather, come out again, I want to
speak to you, I have forgotten to tell you something." The grandfather had no
sooner stuck his head out of the water than Buria Bogatyr seized it and tore
it off; he struck the ground, turned into an eagle, and came back to the
palace ahead of the princess. He called Prince Ivan out to the entrance hall
and said: "Prince Ivan, take this head; the princess will show you three hairs
and ask you to guess from what root this grass comes; for answer just show her
this head."

A little later the princess came to Prince Ivan, showed him the three hairs,
and said: "Prince, guess from what root this grass comes; if you guess right,
I will marry you, if not, do not hold it amiss if I don't." Prince Ivan took
the head from under his coat and struck the table with it, saying: "Here is
your root." The princess thought to herself: "They are brave knights!" Then
she said: "Please, Prince Ivan, let me change my dress in another room."
Prince Ivan let her go; she went on the porch, struck the ground, turned into
a gull, and again flew out to sea. Buria Bogatyr took the head from the prince,
went into the yard, struck the head against the porch, and said: "Where you
were before, be now too." The head flew forth, came to the place ahead of the
princess, and grew together with the body.

The princess stopped at the seashore, struck the ground, turned into a lovely
maiden, and said: "Grandfather, grandfather, come out and speak to me!" Her
grandfather came out saying: "My little granddaughter, what do you want?" "Was
not your head in our palace?" "I do not know, granddaughter, I have been sound
asleep." "No, grandfather, your head was there." "Apparently it was torn off
the last time you came here to speak to me." She struck the ground, turned
into a gull, and flew home. She changed her dress, came back to the banquet
hall, and sat beside Prince Ivan.

The next day they went to the church to be lawfully wedded; after they
returned, Buria Bogatyr led Prince Ivan to his bed room, showed him three rods,
one of iron, one of copper, and one of pewter, and said: "If you want to
remain alive, let me lie with the princess in your place." The prince
consented. The king led the young couple to their nuptial bed. At that moment
Buria Bogatyr took the place of the prince, lay down, and began to snore; the
princess put one leg on him, then another, and began to smother him with a
pillow. Buria Bogatyr jumped from under her, took the iron rod, and began to
beat her. He beat her until he broke the rod; then he took the copper rod and
broke it too; then he began to beat her with the pewter rod. The princess
began to implore him and swore solemn oaths that she would never again try to
do such a thing. Next morning Buria Bogatyr rose, went to Prince Ivan, and
said: "Now, brother, go and see how well I have chastised your wife; the three
rods I prepared are all broken. Now live happily together, love each other,
and do not forget me."

