


A widowed peasant with a daughter married a widow who also had a daughter;
thus they each had a stepchild. The stepmother was envious and nagged the old
man constantly, saying: "Take your daughter to the woods, to a mud hut; there
she will spin more." What could the peasant do? He did as his wife told him,
took his daughter to a mud hut, gave her a steel and flint and a bag of grits,
and said: "Here is fire for you, do not let it die out; cook your kasha, sit
and spin, and keep the hut locked." Night came. The girl heated the stove and
cooked her kasha; from somewhere a little mouse came out and said: "Maiden,
maiden, give me a spoonful of kasha." "Oh, little mouse, cheer me in my
loneliness, and I will give you more than one spoonful of kasha. I shall let
you eat your fill of it." The mouse ate his fill and left.

At night a bear broke into the hut and said: "Now, girl, put out the light and
let us play blindman's buff." The mouse ran up the maiden's shoulder and
whispered into her ear: "Fear not, maiden. Say to him, 'Very well, let us
play.' Then put out the light and crawl under the stove; I shall run about and
ring the little bell." So they did. The bear chased the little mouse but could
not catch him; he began to roar and hurl logs of wood; he hurled and hurled
them but did not hit his mark. He got tired and said: "Ah, little girl, you're
an expert player of blindman's buff. To reward you I shall send you a drove of
horses and a cartful of goods tomorrow morning."

Next morning the old man's wife said: "Go, old man, visit your daughter, see
how much she has spun since yesterday." The old man went and his wife sat and
waited for him to bring back his daughter's bones. Suddenly tile dog began to
bark: "Bow-wow-wow, the daughter is coming, with her father driving a drove of
horses and bringing a cartful of goods." "You're lying, dog! Those are her
bones rattling and clattering in my husband's basket." The gate creaked, the
horses ran into the yard, and the stepmother beheld the father and daughter
sitting on a cart laden with goods. The woman's eyes gleamed with greed.
"That's not very much," she cried. "Now take my daughter to the woods for the
night. She will come home driving two droves of horses and bringing two
cartfuls of goods."

The peasant took his wife's daughter to the mud hut and provided her also with
food and fire. At nightfall she cooked gruel. The mouse came and asked her for
some kasha. But she cried: "Oh, you vermin!" And she hurled a spoon at him.
The mouse ran away, Natasha gobbled up all the kasha by herself, and, having
eaten, put out the light and lay down in a corner. At midnight the bear broke
into the mud hut and said: "Hey, where are you, little girl? Let's play
blindman's buff." The maiden did not answer, but her teeth rattled from fear.
"Ah, so there you are! Here's a little bell. Run, I will try to catch you."
She took the little bell, her hand trembled, the bell rang incessantly, and
the mouse said: "That wicked maiden will meet her death." Next morning the
wife sent the old man to the woods, saying: "Go now! My daughter will bring
back two cartfuls of goods and drive two droves of horses." The peasant went
and his wife sat at the gate. The dog barked: "Bow-wow-wow, the wife's
daughter is coming, her bones are rattling in the basket, and the old man sits
on an empty cart." "You're lying, dog! My daughter is driving herds and
bringing full carts." She looked up and there was the old man at the gate. He
handed his wife a basket; she opened the basket, saw the bones, began to howl,
and grew so angry that from grief and spite she died the next day. But the old
man lived happily with his daughter all his life and took into his house a
wealthy son-in-law.

